

涡堤孩

目录

CHAPTER I HOW THE KNIGHT CAME TO THE FISHERMAN

CHAPTER II IN WHAT WAY UNDINE HAD COME TO THE FISHERMAN

CHAPTER III HOW THEY FOUND UNDINE AGAIN

CHAPTER IV OF THAT WHICH THE KNIGHT ENCOUNTERED IN THE WOOD

CHAPTER V HOW THE KNIGHT LIVED ON THE LITTLE PROMONTORY

CHAPTER VI OF A NUPTIAL CEREMONY

CHAPTER VII WHAT FURTHER HAPPENED ON THE EVENING OF THE WEDDING

CHAPTER VIII THE DAY AFTER THE WEDDING

CHAPTER IX HOW THE KNIGHT TOOK HIS YOUNG WIFE WITH HIM

CHAPTER X HOW THEY LIVED IN THE CITY

CHAPTER XI THE ANNIVERSARY OF BERTALDA’S NAME-DAY

CHAPTER XII HOW THEY DEPARTED FROM THE IMPERIAL CITY

CHAPTER XIII HOW THEY LIVED AT CASTLE RINGSTETTEN

CHAPTER XIV HOW BERTALDA RETURNED HOME WITH THE KNIGHT

CHAPTER XV THE JOURNEY TO VIENNA

CHAPTER XVI HOW IT FARED FURTHER WITH HULDBRAND

CHAPTER XVII THE KNIGHT’S DREAM

CHAPTER XVIII HOW THE KNIGHT HULDBRAND IS MARRIED

CHAPTER XIX HOW THE KNIGHT HULDBRAND WAS BURIED

引子

涡堤孩新婚歌

快来吧，涡堤孩！

第一章 骑士来渔翁家的情形

第二章 涡堤孩到渔人家里的情形

第三章 他们找到涡堤孩的情形

第四章 骑士在林中经过的情形

第五章 骑士住在湖边的情形

第六章 结婚

第七章 结婚以后当晚的情形

第八章 结婚次日

第九章 骑士偕其妻同归

第十章 他们在城中居住的情形

第十一章 培儿托达的生日

第十二章 他们从皇城动身旅行

第十三章 他们居住在林斯推顿城堡时的情形

第十四章 培儿托达偕骑士回家的情形

第十五章 维也纳旅行

第十六章 黑尔勃朗此后所遭逢的情形

第十七章 骑士的梦

第十八章 黑尔勃郎举行婚礼的情形

第十九章 骑士黑尔勃郎埋葬的情形







CHAPTER I　HOW THE KNIGHT CAME TO THE FISHERMAN


There was once, it may be now many hundred years ago, a good old fisherman, who was sitting one fine evening before his door, mending his nets. The part of the country in which he lived was extremely pretty.The greensward, on which his cottage stood, ran far into the lake, and it seemed as if it was from love for the blue clear waters that the tongue of land had stretched itself out into them, while with an equally fond embrace the lake had encircled the green pasture rich with waving grass and fowers, and the refreshing shade of trees.The one welcomed the other, and it was just this that made each so beautiful.There were indeed few human beings, or rather none at all, to be met with on this pleasant spot, except the fsherman and his family.For at the back of this little promontory there lay a very wild forest, which, both from its gloom and pathless solitude as well as from the wonderful creatures and illusions with which it was said to abound, was avoided by most people except in cases of necessity.The pious old fisherman, however, passed through it many a time undisturbed, when he was taking the choice fsh, which he had caught at his beautiful home, to a large town situated not far from the confnes of the forest.The principal reason why it was so easy for him to pass through this forest was because the tone of his thoughts was almost entirely of a religious character, and besides this, whenever he set foot upon the evil reputed shades, he was wont to sing some holy song, with a clear voice and a sincere heart.

While sitting over his nets this evening, unsuspicious of any evil, a sudden fear came upon him, at the sound of a rustling in the gloom of the forest, as of a horse and rider, the noise approaching nearer and nearer to the little promontory. All that he had dreamed, in many a stormy night, of the mysteries of the forest, now fashed at once through his mind；foremost of all, the image of a gigantic snow-white man, who kept unceasingly nodding his head in a portentous manner.Indeed, when he raised his eyes toward the wood it seemed to him as if he actually saw the nodding man approaching through the dense foliage.He soon, however, reassured himself, reflecting that nothing serious had ever befallen him even in the forest itself, and that upon this open tongue of land the evil spirit would be still less daring in the exercise of his power.At the same time he repeated aloud a text from the Bible with all his heart, and this so inspired him with courage that he almost smiled at the illusion he had allowed to possess him.

The white nodding man was suddenly transformed into a brook long familiar to him, which ran foaming from the forest and discharged itself into the lake. The noise, however, which he had heard, was caused by a knight beautifully apparelled, who, emerging from the deep shadows of the wood, came riding toward the cottage.A scarlet mantle was thrown over his purple gold-embroidered doublet；a red and violet plume waved from his golden-colored head-gear；and a beautifully and richly ornamented sword fashed from his shoulder-belt.The white steed that bore the knight was more slenderly formed than war-horses generally are, and he stepped so lightly over the turf that this green and flowery carpet seemed scarcely to receive the slightest injury from his tread.The old fisherman did not, however, feel perfectly secure in his mind, although he tried to convince himself that no evil was to be feared from so graceful an apparition；and therefore he politely took off his hat as the knight approached, and remained quietly with his nets.Presently the stranger drew up, and inquired whether he and his horse could have shelter and care for the night.

“As regards your horse, good sir，”replied the fisherman.“I can assign him no better stable than this shady pasture, and no better provender than the grass growing on it. Yourself, however, I will gladly welcome to my small cottage, and give you supper and lodging as good as we have.”

The knight was well satisfied with this；he alighted from his horse, and, with the assistance of the fsherman, he relieved it from saddle and bridle, and turned it loose upon the fowery green. Then addressing his host, he said：“Even had I found you less hospitable and kindly disposed, my worthy old fisherman, you would nevertheless scarcely have got rid of me to-day, for, as I see, a broad lake lies before us, and to ride back into that mysterious wood, with the shades of evening coming on, heaven keep me from it！”

“We will not talk too much of that，”said the fsherman, and he led his guest into the cottage.

There, beside the hearth, from which a scanty fre shed a dimlight through the cleanly-kept room, sat the fsherman's aged wife in a capacious chair. At the entrance of the noble guest she rose to give him a kindly welcome, but resumed her seat of honor without offering it to the stranger.Upon this the fsherman said with a smile：“You must not take it amiss of her, young sir, that she has not given up to you the most comfortable seat in the house；it is a custom among poor people, that it should belong exclusively to the aged.”

“Why, husband，”said the wife, with a quiet smile，“what can you be thinking of?Our guest belongs no doubt to Christian men, and how could it come into the head of the good young blood to drive old people from their chairs?Take a seat, my young master，”she continued, turning toward the knight；“over there, there is a right pretty little chair, only you must not move about on it too roughly, for one of its legs is no longer of the frmest.”

The knight fetched the chair carefully, sat down upon it good-humoredly, and it seemed to him as if he were related to this little household, and had just returned from abroad.

The three worthy people now began to talk together in the most friendly and familiar manner. With regard to the forest, about which the knight made some inquiries, the old man was not inclined to be communicative；he felt it was not a subject suited to approaching night, but the aged couple spoke freely of their home and former life, and listened also gladly when the knight recounted to them his travels, and told them that he had a castle near the source of the Danube, and that his name was Sir Huldbrand of Ringstetten.

During the conversation, the stranger had already occasionally heard a splash against the little low window, as if some one weresprinkling water against it. Every time the noise occurred, the old man knit his brow with displeasure；but when at last a whole shower was dashed against the panes, and bubbled into the room through the decayed casement, he rose angrily, and called threateningly from the window：“Undine！will you for once leave off these childish tricks?and to-day, besides, there is a stranger knight with us in the cottage.”

All was silent without, only a suppressed laugh was audible, and the fsherman said as he returned：“You must pardon it in her, my honored guest, and perhaps many a naughty trick besides；but she means no harm by it. It is our foster-child, Undine, and she will not wean herself from this childishness, although she has already entered her eighteenth year.But, as I said, at heart she is thoroughly good.”

“You may well talk，”replied the old woman, shaking her head；“when you come home from fshing or from a journey, her frolics may then be very delightful, but to have her about one the whole day long, and never to hear a sensible word, and instead of fnding her a help in the housekeeping as she grows older, always to be obliged to be taking care that her follies do not completely ruin us, that is quite another thing, and the patience of a saint would be worn out at last.”

“Well, well，”said her husband with a smile，“you have your troubles with Undine, and I have mine with the lake. It often breaks away my dams, and tears my nets to pieces, but for all that, I have an affection for it, and so have you for the pretty child, in spite of all your crosses and vexations.Isn't it so?”

“One can't be very angry with her, certainly，”said the old woman, and she smiled approvingly.

Just then the door flew open, and a beautiful, fair girl glided laughing into the room, and said“You have only been jesting, father, for where is your guest?”

At the same moment, however, she perceived the knight, and stood fixed with astonishment before the handsome youth, Huldbrand was struck with her charming appearance, and dwelt the more earnestly on her lovely features, as he imagined it was only her surprise that gave him this brief enjoyment, and that she would presently turn from his gaze with increased bashfulness. It was, however, quite otherwise；for after having looked at him for some time, she drew near him confidingly, knelt down before him, and said, as she played with a gold medal which he wore on his breast, suspended from a rich chain：“Why, you handsome, kind guest, how have you come to our poor cottage at last?Have you been obliged then to wander through the world for years, before you could fnd your way to us?Do you come out of that wild forest, my beautiful knight?”The old woman's reproof allowed him no time for reply.She admonished the girl to stand up and behave herself and to go to her work.Undine, however, without making any answer drew a little footstool close to Huldbrand's chair, sat down upon it with her spinning, and said pleasantly：“I will work here.”The old man did as parents are wont to do with spoiled children.He affected to observe nothing of Undine's naughtiness and was beginning to talk of something else.But this the girl would not let him do；she said：“I have asked our charming guest whence he comes, and he has not yet answered me.”

“I come from the forest, you beautiful little vision，”returnedHuldbrand；and she went on to say：—

“Then you must tell me how you came there, for it is usually so feared, and what marvellous adventures you met with in it, for it is impossible to escape without something of the sort.”

Huldbrand felt a slight shudder at this remembrance, and looked involuntarily toward the window, for it seemed to him as if one of the strange figures he had encountered in the forest were grinning in there；but he saw nothing but the deep dark night, which had now shrouded everything without. Upon this he composed himself and was on the point of beginning his little history, when the old man interrupted him by saying：“Not so, sir knight！this is no ft hour for such things.”Undine, however, sprang angrily from her little stool, and standing straight before the fsherman with her fair arms fxed in her sides, she exclaimed：“He shall not tell his story, father?He shall not?but it is my will.He shall！He shall in spite of you！”and thus saying she stamped her pretty little foot vehemently on the foor, but she did it all with such a comically graceful air that Huldbrand now felt his gaze almost more riveted upon her in her anger than before in her gentleness.

The restrained wrath of the old man, on the contrary, burst forth violently. He severely reproved Undine's disobedience and unbecoming behavior to the stranger, and his good old wife joined with him heartily.Undine quickly retorted：“If you want to chide me, and won't do what I wish, then sleep alone in your old smoky hut！”and swift as an arrow she few from the room, and fed into the dark night.





CHAPTER II　IN WHAT WAY UNDINE HAD COME TO THE FISHERMAN


Huldbrand and the fsherman sprang from their seats and were on the point of following the angry girl. Before they reached the cottage door, however, Undine had long vanished in the shadowy darkness without, and not even the sound of her light footstep betrayed the direction of her fight.Huldbrand looked inquiringly at his host；it almost seemed to him as if the whole sweet apparition, which had suddenly merged again into the night, were nothing else than one of that band of the wonderful forms which had, but a short time since, carried on their pranks with him in the forest.But the old man murmured between his teeth：“This is not the first time that she has treated us in this way.Now we have aching hearts and sleepless eyes the whole night through；for who knows, that she may not some day come to harm, if she is thus out alone in the dark until daylight.”

“Then let us for God's sake follow her，”cried Huldbrand, anxiously.

“What would be the good of it?”replied the old man.“It would be a sin were I to allow you, all alone, to follow the foolish girl in the solitary night, and my old limbs would not overtake the wildrunaway, even if we knew in what direction she had gone.”

“We had better at any rate call after her, and beg her to come back，”said Huldbrand；and he began to call in the most earnest manner：“Undine！Undine！Pray come back！”

The old man shook his head, saying, that all that shouting would help but little, for the knight had no idea how self-willed the little truant was. But still he could not forbear often calling out with him in the dark night：“Undine！Ah！dear Undine, I beg you to come back—only this once！”

It turned out, however, as the fisherman had said. No Undine was to be heard or seen, and as the old man would on no account consent that Huldbrand should go in search of the fugitive, they were at last both obliged to return to the cottage.Here they found the fre on the hearth almost gone out, and the old wife, who took Undine's flight and danger far less to heart than her husband, had already retired to rest.The old man blew up the fre, laid some dry wood on it, and by the light of the fame sought out a tankard of wine, which he placed between himself and his guest.“You, sir knight，”said he，“are also anxious about that silly girl, and we would both rather chatter and drink away a part of the night than keep turning round on our rush mats trying in vain to sleep.Is it not so?”

Huldbrand was well satisfied with the plan；the fisherman obliged him to take the seat of honor vacated by the good old housewife, and both drank and talked together in a manner becoming two honest and trusting men. It is true, as often as the slightest thing moved before the windows, or even at times when nothing was moving, one of the two would look up and say：“She is coming！”

Then they would be silent for a moment or two, and as nothing appeared, they would shake their heads and sigh and go on with their talk.

As, however, neither could think of anything but of Undine, they knew of nothing better to do than that the old fsherman should tell the story, and the knight should hear, in what manner Undine had frst come to the cottage. He therefore began as follows：—

“It is now about ffteen years ago that I was one day crossing the wild forest with my goods, on my way to the city. My wife had stayed at home, as her wont is, and at this particular time for a very good reason, for God had given us, in our tolerably advanced age, a wonderfully beautiful child.It was a little girl；and a question already arose between us, whether for the sake of the new-comer, we would not leave our lovely home that we might better bring up this dear gift of heaven in some more habitable place.Poor people indeed cannot do in such cases as you may think they ought, sir knight, but, with God's blessing, every one must do what he can.Well, the matter was tolerably in my head as I went along.This slip of land was so dear to me, and I shuddered when, amid the noise and brawls of the city, I thought to myself，‘In such scenes as these, or in one not much more quiet, thou wilt also soon make thy abode！'But at the same time I did not murmur against the good God；on the contrary, I thanked him in secret for the new-born babe；I should be telling a lie, too, were I to say, that on my journey through the wood, going or returning, anything befell me out of the common way, and at that time I had never seen any of its fearful wonders.The Lord was ever with me in those mysterious shades.”

As he spoke he took his little cap from his bald head, and remained for a time occupied with prayerful thoughts；he then covered himself again, and continued：—

“On this side the forest, alas！a sorrow awaited me. My wife came to meet me with tearful eyes and clad in mourning.‘Oh！Good God！'I groaned，‘where is our dear child?speak！'—‘With him on whom you have called, dear husband，'she replied；and we now entered the cottage together weeping silently.I looked around for the little corpse, and it was then only that I learned how it had all happened.

“My wife had been sitting with the child on the edge of the lake, and as she was playing with it, free of all fear and full of happiness, the little one suddenly bent forward, as if attracted by something very beautiful in the water. My wife saw her laugh, the dear angel, and stretch out her little hands；but in a moment she had sprung out of her mother's arms, and had sunk beneath the watery mirror.I sought long for our little lost one；but it was all in vain；there was no trace of her to be found.

“The same evening we, childless parents, were sitting silently together in the cottage；neither of us had any desire to talk, even had our tears allowed us. We sat gazing into the fre on the hearth.Presently, we heard something rustling outside the door：it flew open, and a beautiful little girl three or four years old, richly dressed, stood on the threshold smiling at us.We were quite dumb with astonishment, and I knew not at frst whether it were a vision or a reality.But I saw the water dripping from her golden hair and rich garments, and I perceived that the pretty child had been lying inthe water, and needed help.‘Wife，'said I，‘no one has been able to save our dear child；yet let us at any rate do for others what would have made us so blessed.'We undressed the little one, put her to bed, and gave her something warm；at all this she spoke not a word, and only fixed her eyes, that reflected the blue of the lake and of the sky, smilingly upon us.Next morning we quickly perceived that she had taken no harm from her wetting, and I now inquired about her parents, and how she had come here.But she gave a confused and strange account.She must have been born far from here, not only because for these ffteen years I have not been able to fnd out anything of her parentage, but because she then spoke, and at times still speaks, of such singular things that such as we are cannot tell but that she may have dropped upon us from the moon.She talks of golden castles, of crystal domes, and heaven knows what besides.The story that she told with most distinctness was, that she was out in a boat with her mother on the great lake, and fell into the water, and that she only recovered her senses here under the trees where she felt herself quite happy on the merry shore.We had still a great misgiving and perplexity weighing on our heart.We had, indeed, soon decided to keep the child we had found and to bring her up in the place of our lost darling；but who could tell us whether she had been baptized or not?She herself could give us no information on the matter.She generally answered our questions by saying that she well knew she was created for Gods praise and glory, and that she was ready to let us do with her whatever would tend to His honor and glory.

“My wife and I thought that if she were not baptized, therewas no time for delay, and that if she were, a good thing could not be repeated too often. And in pursuance of this idea, we reflected upon a good name for the child, for we now were often at a loss to know what to call her.We agreed at last that Dorothea would be the most suitable for her, for I once heard that it meant a gift of God, and she had surely been sent to us by God as a gift and comfort in our misery.She, on the other hand, would not hear of this, and told us that she thought she had been called Undine by her parents, and that Undine she wished still to be called.Now this appeared to me a heathenish name, not to be found in any calendar, and I took counsel therefore of a priest in the city.He also would not hear of the name of Undine, but at my earnest request he came with me through the mysterious forest in order to perform the rite of baptism here in my cottage.The little one stood before us so prettily arrayed and looked so charming that the priest's heart was at once moved within him, and she fattered him so prettily, and braved him so merrily, that at last he could no longer remember the objections he had had ready against the name of Undine.She was therefore baptized‘Undine，'and during the sacred ceremony she behaved with great propriety and sweetness, wild and restless as she invariably was at other times.For my wife was quite right when she said that it has been hard to put up with her.If I were to tell you”—

The knight interrupted the fisherman to draw his attention to a noise, as of a rushing flood of waters, which had caught his ear during the old man's talk, and which now burst against the cottage-window with redoubled fury. Both sprang to the door.There they saw, by the light of the now risen moon, the brook which issuedfrom the wood, widely overflowing its banks, and whirling away stones and branches of trees in its sweeping course.The storm, as if awakened by the tumult, burst forth from the mighty clouds which passed rapidly across the moon；the lake roared under the furious lashing of the wind；the trees of the little peninsula groaned from root to topmost bough, and bent, as if reeling, over the surging waters.

“Undine！for Heaven's sake, Undine.”cried the two men in alarm. No answer was returned, and regardless of every other consideration, they ran out of the cottage, one in this direction, and the other in that, searching and calling.





CHAPTER III　HOW THEY FOUND UNDINE AGAIN


The longer Huldbrand sought Undine beneath the shades of night, and failed to find her, the more anxious and confused did he become. The idea that Undine had been only a mere apparition of the forest, again gained ascendancy over him；indeed, amid the howling of the waves and the tempest, the cracking of the trees, and the complete transformation of a scene lately so calmly beautiful, he could almost have considered the whole peninsula with its cottage and its inhabitants as a mocking illusive vision；but from afar he still ever heard through the tumult the fsherman's anxious call for Undine, and the loud praying and singing of his aged wife.At length he came close to the brink of the swollen stream, and saw in the moonlight how it had taken its wild course directly in front of the haunted forest, so as to change the peninsula into an island.

“Oh God！”he thought to himself，“if Undine has ventured a step into that fearful forest, perhaps in her charming wilfulness, just because I was not allowed to tell her about it；and now the stream may be rolling between us, and she may be weeping on the other side alone, among phantoms and spectres！”A cry of horror escaped him, and he clambered down some rocks and overthrownpine-stems, in order to reach the rushing stream and by wading or swimming to seek the fugitive on the other side. He remembered all the awful and wonderful things which he had encountered, even by day, under the now rustling and roaring branches of the forest.Above all it seemed to him as if a tall man in white, whom he knew but too well, was grinning and nodding on the opposite shore；but it was just these monstrous forms which forcibly impelled him to cross the flood, as the thought seized him that Undine might be among them in the agonies of death and alone.

He had already grasped the strong branch of a pine, and was standing supported by it, in the whirling current, against which he could with difficulty maintain himself；though with a courageous spirit he advanced deeper into it. Just then a gentle voice exclaimed near him：“Venture not, venture not, the old man, the stream, is full of tricks！”

He knew the sweet tones；he stood as if entranced beneath the shadows that duskily shrouded the moon, and his head swam with the swelling of the waves, which he now saw rapidly rising to his waist. Still he would not desist.“If thou art not really there, if thou art only foating about me like a mist, then may I too cease to live and become a shadow like thee, dear, dear Undine！”

Thus exclaiming aloud, he again stepped deeper into the stream.

“Look round thee, oh！look round thee, beautiful but infatuated youth！”cried a voice again close beside him, and looking aside, he saw by the momentarily unveiled moon, a little island formed by the food, on which he perceived under the interweaved branches of the overhanging trees, Undine smiling and happy, nestling in the fowery grass.

Oh！how much more gladly than before did the young man now use the aid of his pine-branch！With a few steps he had crossed the flood which was rushing between him and the maiden, and he was standing beside her on a little spot of turf, safely guarded and screened by the good old trees. Undine had half-raised herself, and now under the green leafy tent she threw her arms round his neck, and drew him down beside her on her soft seat.

“You shall tell me your story here, beautiful friend，”said she, in a low whisper；“the cross old people cannot hear us here：and our roof of leaves is just as good a shelter as their poor cottage.”

“It is heaven itself！”said Huldbrand, embracing the beautiful girl and kissing her fervently.

The old fisherman meanwhile had come to the edge of the stream, and shouted across to the two young people；“Why, sir knight, I have received you as one honest-hearted man is wont to receive another, and now here you are caressing my foster-child in secret, and letting me run hither and thither through the night in anxious search of her.”

“I have only just found her myself, old father，”returned the knight.

“So much the better，”said the fisherman；“but now bring her across to me without delay upon frm ground.”

Undine, however, would not hear of this；she declared she would rather go with the beautiful stranger, into the wild forest itself, than return to the cottage, where no one did as she wished, and from which the beautiful knight would himself depart sooneror later. Then, throwing her arms round Huldbrand, she sang with indescribable grace：—

A stream ran out of the misty vale

Its fortunes to obtain，

the ocean’s depths it found a home

And ne’er returned again.

The old fisherman wept bitterly at her song, but this did not seem to affect her particularly. She kissed and caressed her new friend, who at last said to her：“Undine, if the old man's distress does not touch your heart, it touches mine—let us go back to him.”

She opened her large blue eyes in amazement at him, and spoke at last, slowly and hesitatingly：“If you think so—well, whatever you think is right to me. But the old man yonder must frst promise me that he will let you, without objection, relate to me what you saw in the wood, and—well, other things will settle themselves.”

“Come, only come，”cried the fsherman to her, unable to utter another word：and at the same time he stretched out his arms far over the rushing stream toward her, and nodded his head as if to promise the fulflment of her request, and as he did this, his white hair fell strangely over his face, and reminded Huldbrand of the nodding white man in the forest. Without allowing himself, however, to grow confused by such an idea the young knight took the beautiful girl in his arms, and bore her over the narrow passage which the stream had forced between her little island and the shore.The old man fell upon Undine's neck and could not satisfy the exuberance of his joy；his good wife also came up and caressed the newly-found in the heartiest manner.Not a word of reproach passed their lips；nor was it thought of, for Undine, forgetting all her waywardness, almost overwhelmed her foster-parents with affection and fond expressions.

When at last they had recovered from the excess of their joy, day had already dawned, and had shed its purple hue over the lake；stillness had followed the storm, and the little birds were singing merrily on the wet branches. As Undine now insisted upon hearing the knight's promised story, the aged couple smilingly and readily acceded to her desire.Breakfast was brought out under the trees which screened the cottage from the lake, and they sat down to it with contented hearts—Undine on the grass at the knight's feet, the place chosen by herself.

Huldbrand then proceeded with his story.





CHAPTER IV OF THAT WHICH THE KNIGHT ENCOUNTERED IN THE WOOD


“It is now about eight days ago since I rode into the free imperial city, which lies on the other side of the forest. Soon after my arrival, there was a splendid tournament and running at the ring, and I spared neither my horse nor my lance.Once when I was pausing at the lists, to rest after my merry toil, and was handing back my helmet to one of my squires, my attention was attracted by a female fgure of great beauty, who was standing richly attired on one of the galleries allotted to spectators.I asked my neighbor, and learned from him, that the name of the fair lady was Bertalda, and that she was the foster-daughter of one of the powerful dukes living in the country.I remarked that she also was looking at me, and, as it is wont to be with us young knights, I had already ridden bravely, and now pursued my course with renovated confdence and courage.In the dance that evening I was Bertalda's partner, and I remained so throughout the festival.”

A sharp pain in his left hand, which hung down by his side, here interrupted Huldbrand's narrative, and drew his attention to the aching part. Undine had fastened her pearly teeth upon one of his fingers, appearing at the same time very gloomy and angry.Suddenly, however, she looked up in his eyes with an expression of tender melancholy, and whispered in a soft voice：“It is your own fault.”Then she hid her face, and the knight, strangely confused and thoughtful, continued his narrative.

“This Bertalda was a haughty, wayward girl. Even on the second day she pleased me no longer as she had done on the frst, and on the third day still less.Still I continued about her, because she was more pleasant to me than to any other knight, and thus it was that I begged her in jest to give me one of her gloves.‘I will give it you when you have quite alone explored the ill-famed forest，'said she，‘and can bring me tidings of its wonders.'It was not that her glove was of such importance to me, but the word had been said, and an honorable knight would not allow himself to be urged a second time to such a proof of valor.”

“I think she loved you，”said Undine, interrupting him.

“It seemed so，”replied Huldbrand.

“Well，”exclaimed the girl, laughing，“she must be stupid indeed. To drive away any one dear to her.And moreover, into an ill-omened wood.The forest and its mysteries might have waited long enough for me！”

“Yesterday morning.”continued the knight, smiling kindly at Undine，“I set out on my enterprise. The stems of the trees caught the red tints of the morning light which lay brightly on the green turf, the leaves seemed whispering merrily with each other, and in my heart I could have laughed at the people who could have expected anything to terrify them in this pleasant spot.‘I shall soon have trotted through the forest there and back again，'I said to myself, with a feeling of easy gayety, and before I had even thought of it I was deep within the green shades, and could no longer perceive the plain which lay behind me.Then for the frst time it struck me that I might easily lose my way in the mighty forest, and that this perhaps was the only danger which the wanderer had to fear.I therefore paused and looked round in the direction of the sun, which in the mean while had risen somewhat higher above the horizon.While I was thus looking up I saw something black in the branches of a lofty oak.I thought it was a bear and I grasped my sword；but with a human voice, that sounded harsh and ugly, it called to me from above：‘If I do not nibble away the branches up here, Sir Malapert, what shall we have to roast you with at midnight?'And so saying it grinned and made the branches rustle, so that my horse grew furious and rushed forward with me before I had time to see what sort of a devil it really was.”

“You must not call it so，”said the old fsherman as he crossed himself；his wife did the same silently. Undine looked at the knight with sparkling eyes and said：“The best of the story is that they certainly have not roasted him yet；go on now, you beautiful youth！”

The knight continued his narration：“My horse was so wild that he almost rushed with me against the stems and branches of trees；he was dripping with sweat, and yet would not suffer himself to be held in. At last he went straight in the direction of a rocky precipice；then it suddenly seemed to me as if a tall white man threw himself across the path of my wild steed；the horse trembled with fear and stopped：I recovered my hold of him, and for the first time perceived that my deliverer was no white man, but a brook of silvery brightness, rushing down from a hill by my side and crossing and impeding my horse's course.”

“Thanks, dear Brook，”exclaimed Undine, clapping her little hands. The old man, however, shook his head and looked down in deep thought.

“I had scarcely settled myself in the saddle，”continued Huldbrand，“and seized the reins firmly, when a wonderful little man stood at my side, diminutive, and ugly beyond conception. His complexion was of a yellowish brown, and his nose not much smaller than the rest of his entire person.At the same time he kept grinning with stupid courtesy, exhibiting his huge mouth, and making a thousand scrapes and bows to me.As this farce was now becoming inconvenient to me, I thanked him briefy and turned about my still trembling steed, thinking either to seek another adventure, or in case I met with none, to fnd my way back, for during my wild chase the sun had already passed the meridian；but the little fellow sprang round with the speed of lightning and stood again before my horse.‘Room！'I cried, angrily；‘the animal is wild and may easily run over you.'—‘Ay, ay！'snarled the imp, with a grin still more horribly stupid.‘Give me frst some drink-money, for I have stopped your horse；without me you and your horse would be now both lying in the stony ravine；ugh！'—‘Don't make any more faces，’said I，‘and take your money, even if you are telling lies；for see, it was the good brook there that saved me, and not you, you miserable wight！And at the same time I dropped a piece of gold into his grotesque cap, which he had taken off in his begging.I then trotted on；but he screamed after me, and suddenly with inconceivable quickness wasat my side.I urged my horse into a gallop；the imp ran too, making at the same time strange contortions with his body, half-ridiculous, half-horrible, and holding up the gold-piece, he cried, at every leap，‘False money！false coin！false coin！false money！’—and this he uttered with such a hollow sound that one would have supposed that after every scream he would have fallen dead to the ground.

“His horrid red tongue moreover hung far out of his mouth. I stopped, perplexed, and asked：‘What do you mean by this screaming?take another piece of gold, take two, but leave me.'He then began again his hideous burlesque of politeness, and snarled out：‘Not gold, not gold, my young gentleman.I have too much of that trash myself, as I will show you at once?'

“Suddenly it seemed to me as if I could see through the solid soil as though it were green glass and the smooth earth were as round as a ball；and within, a multitude of goblins were ranking sport with silver and gold；head over heels they were rolling about, pelting each other in jest with the precious metals, and provokingly blowing the gold-dust in each other's eyes. My hideous companion stood partly within and partly without；he ordered the others to reach him up heaps of gold, and showing it to me with a laugh, he then fung it back again with a ringing noise into the immeasurable abyss.

“He then showed the piece of gold I had given him to the goblins below, and they laughed themselves half-dead over it and hissed at me. At last they all pointed at me with their metal-stained fngers, and more and more wildly, and more and more densely, and more and more madly, the swarm of spirits came clambering up to me.I was seized with terror as my horse had been before：I put spursto him, and I know not how far I galloped for the second time wildly into the forest.

“At length, when I again halted, the coolness of evening was around me. Through the branches of the trees I saw a white foot-path gleaming, which I fancied must lead from the forest toward the city.I was anxious to work my way in that direction；but a face perfectly white and indistinct, with features ever changing, kept peering at me between the leaves；I tried to avoid it, but wherever I went it appeared also.Enraged at this, I determined at last to ride at it, when it gushed forth volumes of foam upon me and my horse, obliging us half-blinded to make a rapid retreat.Thus it drove us step by step ever away from the foot-path, leaving the way open to us only in one direction.When we advanced in this direction, it kept indeed close behind us, but did not do us the slightest harm.

“Looking around at it occasionally, I perceived that the white face that had besprinkled us with foam belonged to a form equally white and of gigantic stature. Many a time I thought that it was a moving stream, but I could never convince myself on the subject.Wearied out, the horse and his rider yielded to the impelling power of the white man, who kept nodding his head, as if he would say，‘Quite right, quite right！'And thus at last we came out here to the end of the forest, where I saw the turf, and the lake, and your little cottage, and where the tall white man disappeared.”

“It's well that he's gone，”said the old fsherman；and now he began to talk of the best way by which his guest could return to his friends in the city. Upon this Undine began to laugh slyly to herself；Huldbrand observed it, and said：“I thought you were glad to see mehere；why then do you now rejoice when my departure is talked of?”

“Because you cannot go away，”replied Undine.“Just try it once, to cross that overfowed forest stream with a boat, with your horse, or alone, as you may fancy. Or rather don't try it, for you would be dashed to pieces by the stones and trunks of trees which are carried down by it with the speed of lightning.And as to the lake, I know it well；father dare not venture out far enough with his boat.”

Huldbrand rose, smiling, in order to see whether things were as Undine had said；the old man accompanied him, and the girl danced merrily along by their side. They found every thing, indeed, as Undine had described, and the knight was obliged to submit to remain on the little tongue of land, that had become an island, till the food should subside.As the three were returning to the cottage after their ramble, the knight whispered in the ear of the little maiden“Well, how is it, my pretty Undine—are you angry at my remaining?”

“Ah！”she replied, peevishly，“let me alone. If I had not bitten you, who knows how much of Bertalda would have appeared in your story?”





CHAPTER V　HOW THE KNIGHT LIVED ON THE LITTLE PROMONTORY


After having been much driven to and fro in the world, you have perhaps, my dear reader, reached at length some spot where all was well with thee；where the love for home and its calm peace, innate to all, has again sprung up within thee；where thou hast thought that this home was rich with all the flowers of childhood and of the purest, deepest love that rests upon the graves of those that are gone, and thou hast felt it must be good to dwell here and to build habitations. Even if thou hast erred in this, and hast had afterward bitterly to atone for the error, that is nothing to the purpose now, and thou wouldst not, indeed, voluntarily sadden thyself with the unpleasant recollection.But recall that inexpressibly sweet foreboding, that angelic sense of peace, and thou wilt know somewhat of the knight Huldbrand's feelings during his abode on the little promontory.

He often perceived with hearty satisfaction that the forest stream rolled along every day more wildly, making its bed ever broader and broader, and prolonging his sojourn on the island to an indefnite period. Part of the day he rambled about with an old cross-bow, which he had found in a corner of the cottage and had repaired；and, watching for the water-fowl, he killed all that he could for the cottage kitchen.When he brought his booty home, Undine rarely neglected to upbraid him with having so cruelly deprived the happy birds of life；indeed she often wept bitterly at the sight he placed before her.But if he came home another time without having shot anything she scolded him no less seriously, since now, from his carelessness and want of skill, they had to be satisfied with living on fsh.He always delighted heartily in her graceful little scoldings, all the more as she generally strove to compensate for her ill-humor by the sweetest caresses.The old people took pleasure in the intimacy of the young pair；they regarded them as betrothed, or even as already united in marriage, and living on this isolated spot, as a succor and support to them in their old age.It was this same sense of seclusion that suggested the idea also to Huldbrand's mind that he was already Undine's accepted one.He felt as if there were no world beyond these surrounding waters, or as if he could never recross them to mingle with other men；and when at times his grazing horse would neigh as if inquiringly to remind him of knightly deeds, or when the coat of arms on his embroidered saddle and horse-gear shone sternly upon him, or when his beautiful sword would suddenly fall from the nail on which it was hanging in the cottage, gliding from the scabbard as it fell, he would quiet the doubts of his mind by saving：“Undine is no fisherman's daughter；she belongs in all probability to some illustrious family abroad.”

There was only one thing to which he had a strong aversion, and this was, when the old dame reproved Undine in his presence. The wayward girl, it is true, laughed at it for the most part, withoutattempting to conceal her mirth；but it seemed to him as if his honor were concerned, and yet he could not blame the old fisherman's wife, for Undine always deserved at least ten times as many reproofs as she received；so, in his heart he felt the balance in favor of the old woman, and his whole life fowed onward in calm enjoyment.

There came, however, an interruption at last. The fsherman and the knight had been accustomed at their mid-day meal, and also in the evening when the wind roared without, as it was always wont to do toward night, to enjoy together a fask of wine.But now the store which the fsherman had from time to time brought with him from the town, was exhausted, and the two men were quite out of humor in consequence.

Undine laughed at them excessively all day, but they were neither of them merry enough to join in her jests as usual. Toward evening she went out of the cottage to avoid, as she said, two such long and tiresome faces.As twilight advanced, there were again tokens of a storm, and the water rushed and roared.Full of alarm, the knight and the fsherman sprang to the door, to bring home the girl, remembering the anxiety of that night when Huldbrand had frst come to the cottage.Undine, however, met them, clapping her little hands with delight.

“What will you give me，”she said，“to provide you with wine?”or rather，“you need not give me anything，”she continued，“for I am satisfied if you will look merrier and be in better spirits than you have been throughout this whole wearisome day. Only come with me；the forest stream has driven ashore a cask, and I will be condemned to sleep through a whole week if it is not a wine-cask.”The men followed her, and in a sheltered creek on the shore, they actually found a cask, which inspired them with the hope that it contained the generous drink for which they were thirsting.They at once rolled it as quickly as possible toward the cottage, for the western sky was overcast with heavy storm-clouds, and they could observe in the twilight the waves of the lake raising their white, foaming heads, as if looking out for the rain which was presently to pour down upon them.Undine helped the men as much as she was able, and when the storm of rain suddenly burst over them, she said, with a merry threat to the heavy clouds：“Come, come, take care that you don't wet us；we are still some way from shelter.”The old man reproved her for this, as simple presumption, but she laughed softly to herself, and no mischief befell any one in consequence of her levity.Nay, more：contrary to all expectation, they reached the comfortable hearth with their booty perfectly dry, and it was not till they had opened the cask, and had proved that it contained some wonderfully excellent wine, that the rain burst forth from the dark cloud, and the storm raged among the tops of the trees, and over the agitated billows of the lake.

Several bottles were soon filled from the great cask, which promised a supply for many days, and they were sitting drinking and jesting round the glowing fre, feeling comfortably secured from the raging storm without. Suddenly the old fsherman became very grave and said：“Ah, great God！here we are rejoicing over this rich treasure, and he to whom it once belonged, and of whom the foods have robbed it, has probably lost this precious life in their waters.”

“That he has not，”declared Undine, as she smilingly flled theknight's cup to the brim.

But Huldbrand replied：“By my honor, old father, if I knew where to fnd and to rescue him, no knightly errand and no danger would I shirk. So much, however, I can promise you, that if ever again I reach more inhabited lands, I will fnd out the owner of this wine or his heirs, and requite it twofold, nay, threefold.”

This delighted the old man；he nodded approvingly to the knight, and drained his cup with a better conscience and greater pleasure.

Undine, however, said to Huldbrand：“Do as you will with your gold and your reimbursement；but you spoke foolishly about the venturing out in search；I should cry my eyes out, if you were lost in the attempt, and isn't it true, that you would yourself rather stay with me and the good wine.”

“Yes, indeed，”answered Huldbrand, smiling.

“Then，”said Undine，“you spoke unwisely. For charity begins at home, and what do other people concern us?”

The old woman turned away sighing and shaking her head；the fsherman forgot his wonted affection for the pretty girl and scolded her.

“It sounds exactly，”said he, as he finished his reproof，“as if Turks and heathens had brought you up；may God forgive both me and you, you spoiled child.”

“Well，”replied Undine，“for all that, it is what I feel, let who will hate brought me up, and all your words can't help that.”

“Silence！”exclaimed the fsherman, and Undine, who, in spite of her pertness, was exceedingly fearful, shrank from him, and moving tremblingly toward Huldbrand, asked him in a soft tone：“Areyou also angry, dear friend?”

The knight pressed her tender hand and stroked her hair. He could say nothing, for vexation at the old man's severity toward Undine closed his lips：and thus the two couples sat opposite to each other, with angry feelings and embarrassed silence.





CHAPTER VI　OF A NUPTIAL CEREMONY


A low knocking at the door was heard in the midst of this stillness, startling all the inmates of the cottage；for there are times when a little circumstance, happening quite unexpectedly, can unduly alarm us. But there was here the additional cause of alarm that the enchanted forest lay so near, and that the little promontory seemed just now inaccessible to human beings.They looked at each other doubtingly, as the knocking was repeated accompanied by a deep groan, and the knight sprang to reach his sword.But the old man whispered softly：“If it be what I fear, no weapon will help us.”

Undine meanwhile approached the door and called out angrily and boldly：“Spirits of the earth, if you wish to carry on your mischief, Kuhleborn shall teach you something better.”

The terror of the rest was increased by these mysterious words；they looked fearfully at the girl, and Huldbrand was just regaining courage enough to ask what she meant, when a voice said without：“I am no spirit of the earth, but a spirit indeed still within its earthly body. You within the cottage, if you fear God and will help me, open to me.”At these words, Undine had already opened the door, and had held a lamp out in the stormy night, by which they perceived an aged priest standing there, who stepped back in terror at theunexpected sight of the beautiful maiden.He might well think that witchcraft and magic were at work when such a lovely form appeared at such an humble cottage door：he therefore began to pray：“All good spirits praise the Lord！”

“I am no spectre，”said Undine, smiling；“do I then look so ugly?Besides you may see the holy words do not frighten me. I too know of God and understand how to praise Him；every one to be sure in his own way, for so He has created us.Come in, venerable father；you come among good people.”

The holy man entered, bowing and looking round him, with a profound, yet tender demeanor. But the water was dropping from every fold of his dark garment, and from his long white beard and from his gray locks.The fisherman and the knight took him to another apartment and furnished him with other clothes, while they gave the women his own wet attire to dry.The aged stranger thanked them humbly and courteously, but he would on no account accept the knight's splendid mantle, which was offered to him；but he chose instead an old gray overcoat belonging to the fsherman.They then returned to the apartment, and the good old dame immediately vacated her easy-chair for the reverend father, and would not rest till he had taken possession of it.“For，”said she，“you are old and exhausted, and you are moreover a man of God.”Undine pushed under the stranger's feet her little stool, on which she had been wont to sit by the side of Huldbrand, and she showed herself in every way most gentle and kind in her care of the good old man.Huldbrand whispered some raillery at it in her ear, but she replied very seriously：“He is a servant of Him who created us all；holy things arenot to be jested with.”

The knight and the fisherman then refreshed their reverend guest with food and wine, and when he had somewhat recovered himself, he began to relate how he had the day before set out from his cloister, which lay far beyond the great lake, intending to travel to the bishop, in order to acquaint him with the distress into which the monastery and its tributary villages had fallen on account of the extraordinary foods. After a long, circuitous route, which these very floods had obliged him to take, he had been this day compelled, toward evening, to procure the aid of a couple of good boatmen to cross an arm of the lake, which had overfowed its banks.

“Scarcely however，”continued he，“had our small craft touched the waves, than that furious tempest burst forth which is now raging over our heads. It seemed as if the waters had only waited for us, to commence their wildest whirling dance with our little boat.The oars were soon torn out of the hands of my men, and were dashed by the force of the waves further and further beyond our reach.We ourselves, yielding to the resistless powers of nature, helplessly drifted over the surging billows of the lake toward your distant shore, which we already saw looming through the mist and foam.Presently our boat turned round and round as in a giddy whirlpool；I know not whether it was upset, or whether I fell overboard.In a vague terror of inevitable death I drifted on, till a wave cast me here, under the trees on your island.”

“Yes, island！”cried the fsherman；“a short time ago it was only a point of land；but now, since the forest-stream and the lake have become well-nigh bewitched, things are quite different with us.”

“I remarked something of the sort，”said the priest，“as I crept along the shore in the dark, and hearing nothing but the uproar around me. I at last perceived that a beaten foot-path disappeared just in the direction from which the sound proceeded.I now saw the light in your cottage, and ventured hither, and I cannot suffciently thank my heavenly Father that after preserving me from the waters, He has led me to such good and pious people as you are；and I feel this all the more, as I do not know whether I shall ever behold any other beings is this world, except those I now address.”

“What do you mean?”asked the fsherman.

“Do you know then how long this commotion of the elements is to last?”replied the holy man.“And I am old in years. Easily enough may the stream of my life run itself out before the overfowing of the forest-stream may subside.And indeed it were not impossible that more and more of the foaming waters may force their way between you and yonder forest, until you are so far sundered from the rest of the world that your little fshing-boat will no longer be suffcient to carry you across, and the inhabitants of the continent in the midst of their diversions will have entirely forgotten you in your old age.”

The fisherman's wife started at this, crossed herself and exclaimed.“God forbid.”But her husband looked at her with a smile, and said“What creatures we are after all！even were it so, things would not be very different—at least not for you, dear wife—than they now are. For have you for many years been further than the edge of the forest?and have you seen any other human beings than Undine and myself?The knight and this holy man have only come to as lately.They will remain with us if we do become aforgotten island；so you would even be a gainer by it after all.”

“I don't know，”said the old woman；“it is somehow a gloomy thought, when one imagines that one is irrecoverably separated from other people, although, were it otherwise, one might neither know nor see them.”

“Then you will remain with us！then you will remain with us！”whispered Undine, in a low, half-singing tone, as she nestled closer to Huldbrand's side. But he was absorbed in the deep and strange visions of his own mind.

The region on the other side of the forest-river seemed to dissolve into distance during the priest's last words：and the blooming island upon which he lived grew more green, and smiled more freshly in his mind's vision. His beloved one glowed as the fairest rose of this little spot of earth, and even of the whole world, and the priest was actually there.Added to this, at that moment an angry glance from the old dame was directed at the beautiful girl, because even in the presence of the reverend father she leaned so closely on the knight, and it seemed as if a torrent of reproving words were on the point of following.Presently, turning to the priest, Huldbrand broke forth：“Venerable father, you see before you here a pair pledged to each other：and if this maiden and these good old people have no objection, you shall unite us this very evening.”The aged couple were extremely surprised.They had, it is true, hitherto often thought of something of the sort, but they had never yet expressed it, and when the knight now spoke thus, it came upon them as something wholly new and unprecedented.

Undine had become suddenly grave, and looked downthoughtfully while the priest inquired respecting the circumstances of the case, and asked if the old people gave their consent. After much discussion together, the matter was settled；the old dame went to arrange the bridal chamber for the young people, and to look out two consecrated tapers which she had had in her possession for some time, and which she thought essential to the nuptial ceremony.The knight in the mean while examined his gold chain, from which he wished to disengage two rings, that he might make an exchange of them with his bride.

She, however, observing what he was doing, started up from her reverie, and exclaimed：“Not so！my parents have not sent me into the world quite destitute；on the contrary, they must have anticipated with certainty that such an evening as this would come.”Thus saving, she quickly left the room and reappeared in a moment with two costly rings, one of which she gave to her bridegroom, and kept the other for herself. The old fsherman was extremely astonished at this, and still more so his wife, who just then entered, for neither had ever seen these jewels in the child's possession.

“My parents，”said Undine，“sewed these little things into the beautiful frock which I had on, when I came to you. They forbid me, moreover, to mention them to anyone before my wedding evening, so I secretly took them, and kept them concealed until now.”

The priest interrupted all further questionings by lighting the consecrated tapers, which he placed upon a table, and summoned the bridal pair to stand opposite to him. He then gave them to each other with a few short solemn words；the elder couple gave their blessing to the younger, and the bride, trembling and thoughtful, leaned uponthe knight.Then the priest suddenly said：“You are strange people after all.Why did you tell me you were the only people here on the island?and during the whole ceremony, a tall stately man, in a white mantle, has been looking at me through the window opposite.He must still be standing before the door, to see if you will invite him to come into the house.”

“God forbid，”said the old dame with a start；the fisherman shook his head in silence, and Huldbrand sprang to the window. It seemed even to him as if he could still see a white streak, but it soon completely disappeared in the darkness.He convinced the priest that he must have been absolutely mistaken, and they all sat down together round the hearth.





CHAPTER VII　WHAT FURTHER HAPPENED ON THE EVENING OF THE WEDDING


Both before and during the ceremony, Undine had shown herself gentle and quiet；but it now seemed as if all the wayward humors which rioted within her, burst forth all the more boldly and unrestrainedly. She teased her bridegroom and her foster-parents, and even the holy man whom she had so lately reverenced, with all sorts of childish tricks；and when the old woman was about to reprove her, she was quickly silenced by a few grave words from the knight, speaking of Undine now as his wife.Nevertheless, the knight himself was equally little pleased with Undine's childish behavior：but no signs, and no reproachful words were of any avail.It is true, whenever the bride noticed her husband's dissatisfaction—and this occurred occasionally—she became more quiet, sat down by his side, caressed him, whispered something smilingly into his ear, and smoothed the wrinkles that were gathering on his brow.But immediately afterward, some wild freak would again lead her to return to her ridiculous proceedings, and matters would be worse than before.At length the priest said in a serious and kind tone：“My fair young maiden, no one indeed can look at you without delight；but remember so to attune your soul betimes, that it may everharmonize with that of your wedded husband.”

“Soul！”said Undine, laughing；“that sounds pretty enough, and may be a very edifying and useful caution for most people. But when one hasn't a soul at all, I beg you, what is there to attune then?and that is my case.”

The priest was silent and deeply wounded, and with holy displeasure he turned his face from the girl. She, however, went up to him caressingly, and said：“No！listen to me frst, before you look angry, for your look of anger gives me pain, and you must not give pain to any creature who has done you no wrong—only have patience with me, and I will tell you properly what I mean.”

It was evident that she was preparing herself to explain something in detail, but suddenly she hesitated, as if seized with an inward shuddering, and burst out into a food of tears. None of them knew what to make of this ebullition, and flled with various apprehensions they gazed at her in silence.At length, wiping away her tears, and looking earnestly at the reverend man, she said：“There must be something beautiful, but at the same time extremely awful, about a soul.Tell me, holy sir, were it not better that we never shared such a gift?”She was silent again as if waiting for an answer, and her tears had ceased to fow.All in the cottage had risen from their seats and had stepped back from her with horror.She, however, seemed to have eyes for no one but the holy man；her features wore an expression of fearful curiosity, which appeared terrible to those who saw her.“The soul must be a heavy burden，”she continued, as no one answered her，“very heavy！for even its approaching image overshadows me with anxiety and sadness.And, ah！I was so light-hearted and so merry till now！”

And she burst into a fresh food of tears, and covered her face with the drapery she wore. Then the priest went up to her with a solemn air, and spoke to her, and conjured her by the name of the Most Holy to cast aside the veil that enveloped her, if any spirit of evil possessed her.But she sank on her knees before him, repeating all the sacred words he uttered, praising God, and protesting that she wished well with the whole world.Then at last the priest said to the knight：“Sir bridegroom, I will leave you alone with her whom I have united to you in marriage.So far as I can discover there is nothing of evil in her, but much indeed that is mysterious.I commend to you—prudence, love, and fdelity.”

So saying, he went out, and the fsherman and his wife followed him, crossing themselves.

Undine had sunk on her knees：she unveiled her face and said, looking timidly round on Huldbrand：“Alas！you will surely now not keep me as your own；and yet I have done no evil, poor child that I am！”As she said this, she looked so exquisitely graceful and touching, that her bridegroom forgot all the horror he had felt, and all the mystery that clung to her, and hastening to her he raised her in his arms. She smiled through her tears；it was a smile like the morning-light playing on a little stream.

“You cannot leave me，”she whispered, with confdent security, stroking the knight's cheek with her tender hand. Huldbrand tried to dismiss the fearful thoughts that still lurked in the background of his mind, persuading him that he was married to a fairy or to some malicious and mischievous being of the spirit world, only the singlequestion half unawares escaped his lips：“My little Undine, tell me this one thing, what was it you said of spirits of the earth and of Kuhleborn, when the priest knocked at the door?”

“It was nothing but fairy tales！—children's fairy tales！”said Undine, with all her wonted gayety；“I frightened you at frst with them, and then you frightened me, that's the end of our story and of our nuptial evening.”

“Nay！that it isn't，”said the knight, intoxicated with love, and extinguishing the tapers, he bore his beautiful beloved to the bridal chamber by the light of the moon which shone brightly through the windows.





CHAPTER VIII　THE DAY AFTER THE WEDDING


The fresh light of the morning awoke the young married pair. Wonderful and horrible dreams had disturbed Huldbrand's rest；he had been haunted by spectres, who, grinning at him by stealth, had tried to disguise themselves as beautiful women, and from beautiful women they all at once assumed the faces of dragons, and when he started up from these hideous visions, the moonlight shone pale and cold into the room；terrified he looked at Undine, who still lay in unaltered beauty and grace.Then he would press a light kiss upon her rosy lips, and would fall asleep again only to be awakened by new terrors.After he had refected on all this, now that he was fully awake, he reproached himself for any doubt that could have led him into error with regard to his beautiful wife.He begged her to forgive him for the injustice he had done her, but she only held out to him her fair hand, sighed deeply, and remained silent.But a glance of exquisite fervor beamed from her eyes such as he had never seen before, carrying with it the full assurance that Undine bore him no ill-will.

He then rose cheerfully and left her, to join his friends in the common apartment. He found the three sitting round the hearth, with an air of anxiety about them, as if they dared not venture to speakaloud.The priest seemed to be praying in his inmost spirit that all evil might be averted.When, however, they saw the young husband come forth so cheerfully the careworn expression of their faces vanished.The old fsherman even began to jest with the knight, so pleasantly, that the aged wife smiled good-humoredly as she listened to them.Undine at length made her appearance.All rose to meet her and all stood still with surprise, for the young wife seemed so strange to them and yet the same.The priest was the frst to advance toward her with paternal arms affection beaming in his face, and, as he raised his hand to bless her, the beautiful woman sank reverently on her knees before him.With a few humble and gracious words she begged him to forgive her for any foolish things she might have said the evening before, and entreated him in an agitated tone to pray for the welfare of her soul.She then rose, kissed her foster-parents, and thanking them for all the goodness they had shown her, she exclaimed：“Oh！I now feel in my innermost heart, how much, how infnitely much, you have done for me, dear, kind people！”

She could not at frst desist from her caresses, but scarcely had she perceived that the old woman was busy in preparing breakfast, than she went to the hearth, cooked and arranged the meal, and would not suffer the good old mother to take the least trouble.

She continued thus throughout the whole day, quiet, kind, and attentive—at once a little matron and a tender, bashful girl.

The three who had known her longest expected every moment to see some whimsical vagary of her capricious spirit burst forth. But they waited in vain for it.Undine remained as mild and gentle as an angel.The holy father could not take his eyes from her, andhe said repeatedly to the bridegroom：“The goodness of heaven, sir, has intrusted a treasure to you yesterday through me, unworthy as I am；cherish it as you ought, and it will promote your temporal and eternal welfare.”

Toward evening Undine was hanging on the knight's arm with humble tenderness, and drew him gently out of the door, where the declining sun was shining pleasantly on the fresh grass, and upon the tall, slender stems of the trees. The eyes of the young wife were moist, as with the dew of sadness and love, and a tender and fearful secret seemed hovering on her lips, which, however, was only disclosed by scarcely audible sighs.She led her husband onward and onward in silence；when he spoke, she only answered him with looks, in which, it is true, there lay no direct reply to his inquiries, but whole heaven of love and timid devotion.Thus they reached the edge of the swollen forest stream, and the knight was astonished to see it rippling along in gentle waves, without a trace of its former wildness and swell.

“By the morning it will be quite dry，”said the beautiful wife, in a regretful tone，“and you can then travel away wherever you will, without anything to hinder you.”

“Not without you, my little Undine，”replied the knight, laughing.“Remember, even if I wished to desert you, the church, and the spiritual powers, and the emperor, and the empire would interpose and bring the fugitive back again.”

“All depends upon you, all depends upon you，”whispered his wife, half-weeping and half-smiling.“I think, however, nevertheless, that you will keep me with you：I love you so heartily. Now carryme across to that little island that lies before us.The matter shall be decided there.I could easily indeed glide through the rippling waves, but it is so restful in your arms, and if you were to cast me off, I shall have sweetly rested in them once more for the last time.”

Huldbrand, full as he was of strange fear and emotion, knew not what to reply. He took her in his arms and carried her across, remembering now for the first time that this was the same little island from which he had borne her back to the old fisherman on that frst night.On the further side he put her down on the soft grass, and was on the point of placing himself lovingly near his beautiful burden, when she said：“No, there opposite to me！I will read my sentence in your eyes, before your lips speak；now, listen attentively to what I will relate to you.”And she began：—

“You must know, my loved one, that there are beings in the elements which almost appear like mortals, and which rarely allow themselves to become visible to your race. Wonderful salamanders glitter and sport in the flames；lean and malicious gnomes dwell deep within the earth；spirits, belonging to the air, wander through the forests, and a vast family of water-spirits live in the lakes, and streams, and brooks.In resounding domes of crystal, through which the sky looks in with its sun and stars, these latter spirits fnd their beautiful abode；lofty trees of coral with blue and crimson fruits gleam in their gardens；they wander over the pure sand of the sea, and among lovely variegated shells, and amid all exquisite treasures of the old world, which the present is no longer worthy to enjoy；all these the foods have covered with their secret veils of silver, and the noble monuments sparkle below, stately and solemn, and bedewedby the loving waters which allure from them many a beautiful moss-flower and entwining cluster of sea-grass.Those, however, who dwell there are very fair and lovely to behold, and for the most part are more beautiful than human beings.Many a fisherman has been so fortunate as to surprise some tender mermaid as she rose above the waters and sang.He would tell afar of her beauty, and such wonderful beings have been given the name of Undines.You, however, are now actually beholding an Undine.”

The knight tried to persuade himself that his beautiful wife was under the spell of one of her strange humors, and that she was taking pleasure in teasing him with one of her extravagant inventions. But repeatedly as he said this to himself, he could not believe it for a moment；a strange shudder passed through him；unable to utter a word, he stared at the beautiful narrator with an immovable gaze.Undine shook her head sorrowfully, drew a deep sigh, and then proceeded as follows：—

“Our condition would be far superior to that of other human beings—for human beings we call ourselves, being similar to them in form and culture—but there is one evil peculiar to us. We and our like in the other elements, vanish into dust and pass away, body and spirit, so that not a vestige of us remains behind；and when you mortals hereafter awake to a purer life, we remain with the sand and the sparks and the wind and the waves.Hence we have also no souls；the element moves us, and is often obedient to us while we live, though it scatters us to dust when we die；and we are merry, without having aught to grieve us—merry as the nightingales and the little gold-fishes and other pretty children of nature.But allthings aspire to be higher than they are.Thus, my father, who is a powerful water-prince in the Mediterranean Sea, desired that his only daughter should become possessed of a soul, even though she must then endure many of the sufferings of those thus endowed.Such as we are, however, can only obtain a soul by the closest union of affection with one of your human race.I am now possessed of a soul, and my soul thanks you, my inexpressibly beloved one, and it will ever thank you, if you do not make my whole life miserable.For what is to become of me, if you avoid and reject me?Still, I would not retain you by deceit.And if you mean to reject me, do so now, and return alone to the shore.I will dive into this brook, which is my uncle；and here in the forest, far removed from other friends, he passes his strange and solitary life.He is, however, powerful, and is esteemed and beloved by many great streams；and as he brought me hither to the fsherman, a light-hearted, laughing child, he will take me back again to my parents, a loving, suffering, and soul-endowed woman.”

She was about to say still more, but Huldbrand embraced her with the most heartfelt emotion and love, and bore her back again to the shore. It was not till he reached it, that he swore amid tears and kisses, never to forsake his sweet wife, calling himself more happy than the Greek Pygmalion, whose beautiful statue received life from Venus and became his loved one.In endearing confdence, Undine walked back to the cottage, leaning on his arm；feeling now for the frst time, with all her heart, how little she ought to regret the forsaken crystal palaces of her mysterious father.





CHAPTER IX　HOW THE KNIGHT TOOK HIS YOUNG WIFE WITH HIM


When Huldbrand awoke from his sleep on the following morning, and missed his beautiful wife from his side, he began to indulge again in the strange thoughts, that his marriage and the charming Undine herself were but feeting and deceptive illusions. But at the same moment she entered the room, sat down beside him, and said：“I have been out rather early to see if my uncle keeps his word.He has already led all the waters back again into his own calm channel, and he now fows through the forest, solitarily and dreamily as before.His friends in the water and the air have also returned to repose：all will again go on quietly and regularly, and you can travel homeward when you will, dry-shod.”

It seemed to Huldbrand as though he were in a waking dream, so little could he reconcile himself to the strange relationship of his wife. Nevertheless he made no remark on the matter, and the exquisite grace of his bride soon lulled to rest every uneasy misgiving.When he was afterward standing before the door with her, and looking over the green peninsula with its boundary of clear waters, he felt so happy in this cradle of his love, that he exclaimed：“Why shall we travel so soon as to-day?We shall scarcely find more pleasantdays in the world yonder than those we have spent in this quiet little shelter.Let us yet see the sun go down here twice or thrice more.”

“As my lord wills，”replied Undine, humbly.“It is only that the old people will, at all events, part from me with pain, and when they now for the first time perceive the true soul within me, and how I can now heartily love and honor, their feeble eyes will be dimmed with plentiful tears. At present they consider my quietness and gentleness of no better promise than before, like the calmness of the lake when the air is still；and, as matters now are, they will soon learn to cherish a flower or a tree as they have cherished me.Do not, therefore, let me reveal to them this newly-bestowed and loving heart, just at the moment when they must lose it for this world；and how could I conceal it, if we remain longer together?”

Huldbrand conceded the point；he went to the aged people and talked with them over the journey, which he proposed to undertake immediately. The holy father offered to accompany the young married pair, and, after a hasty farewell, he and the knight assisted the beautiful bride to mount her horse, and walked with rapid step by her side over the dry channel of the forest-stream into the wood beyond.Undine wept silently but bitterly, and the old people gave loud expression to their grief.It seemed as if they had a presentiment of all they were now losing in their foster-child.

The three travellers had reached in silence the densest shades of the forest. It must have been a fair sight, under that green canopy of leaves, to see Undine's lovely form, as she sat on her noble and richly ornamented steed, with the venerable priest in the white garb of his order on one side of her, and on the other the blooming youngknight in his gay and splendid attire, with his sword at his girdle.Huldbrand had no eyes but for his beautiful wife Undine, who had dried her tears, had no eyes but for him, and they soon fell into a mute, voiceless converse of glance and gesture, from which they were only roused at length by the low talking of the reverend father with a fourth traveller, who in the mean while had joined them unobserved.

He wore a white garment almost resembling the dress of the priests order, except that his hood hung low over his face, and his whole attire foated round him in such vast folds that he was obliged every moment to gather it up, and throw it over his arm, or dispose of it in some way, and yet it did not in the least seem to impede his movements. When the young couple frst perceived him, he was just saying：“And so, venerable sir.I have now dwelt for many years here in the forest, and yet no one could call me a hermit, in your sense of the word.For, as I said, I know nothing of penance, and I do not think I have any especial need of it.I lose the forest only for this reason, that its beauty is quite peculiar to itself, and it amuses me to pass along in my fowing white garments among the eases and dusky shadows, while now and then a sweet sunbeam shines down unexpectedly upon me.”

“You are a very strange man，”replied the priest，“and I should like to be more closely acquainted with you.”

“And to pass from one thing to another, who may you be yourself?”asked the stranger.

“I am called Father Heilmann，”said the holy man；“and I come from the monastery of‘our Lady'which lies on the other side of thelake.”

“Indeed，”replied the stranger；“my name is Kuhleborn, and so far as courtesy is concerned I might claim the title of Lord of Kuhleborn, or free Lord of Kuhleborn；for I am as free as the birds in the forest and perhaps a little more so. For example, I have now something to say to the young lady there.”And before they were aware of his intention, he was at the other side of the priest, close beside Undine, stretching himself up to whisper something in her ear.

But she turned from him with alarm, and exclaimed：“I have nothing more to do with you.”

“Ho, ho，”laughed the stranger，“what is this immensely grand marriage you have made, that you don't know your own relations any longer?Have you forgotten your uncle Kuhleborn, who so faithfully bore you on his back through this region?”

“I beg you, nevertheless，”replied Undine，“not to appear in my presence again. I am now afraid of you；and suppose my husband should learn to avoid me when he sees me in such strange company and with such relations！”

“My little niece，”said Kuhleborn，“you must not forget that I am with you here as a guide；the spirits of earth that haunt this place might otherwise play some of their stupid pranks with you. Let me therefore go quietly on with you；the old priest there remembered me better than you appear to have done, for he assured me just now that I seemed familiar to him, and that I must have been with him in the boat, out of which he fell into the water.I was so, truly enough；for I was the water-spout that carried him out of it and washed himsafely ashore for your wedding.”

Undine and the knight turned toward Father Heilmann；but he seemed walking on, as in a sort of dream, and no longer to be conscious of all that was passing. Undine then said to Kuhleborn，“I see yonder the end of the forest.We no longer need your help, and nothing causes us alarm but yourself.I beg you, therefore, in all love and good-will, vanish, and let us proceed in peace.”

Kuhleborn seemed to become angry at this；his countenance assumed a frightful expression, and he grinned fercely at Undine, who screamed aloud and called upon her husband for assistance. As quick as lightning, the knight sprang to the other side of the horse, and aimed his sharp sword at Kuhleborn's head.But the sword cut through a waterfall, which was rushing down near them from a lofty crag；and with a splash, which almost sounded like a burst of laughter, it poured over them and wet them through to the skin.

The priest, as if suddenly awaking, exclaimed：“I have long been expecting that, for the stream ran down from the height so close to us. At first it really seemed to me like a man, and as if it could speak.”As the waterfall came rushing down, it distinctly uttered these words in Huldbrand's ear：—

Rash knight，

Brave knight，

Rage, feel I not，

Chide, will I not.

But ever guard thy little wife as well，

Rash knight, brave knight！Protect her well！

A few footsteps more, and they were upon open ground. The imperial city lay bright before them, and the evening sun, which gilded its towers, kindly dried the garments of the drenched wanderers.





CHAPTER X　HOW THEY LIVED IN THE CITY


The sudden disappearance of the young knight, Huldbrand von Ringstetten, from the imperial city, had caused great sensation and solicitude among those who had admired him, both for his skill in the tournament and the dance, and no less so for his gentle and agreeable manners. His servants would not quit the place without their master, although not one of them would have had the courage to go in quest of him into the shadowy recesses of the forest.They therefore remained in their quarters, inactively hoping, as men are wont to do, and keeping alive the remembrance of their lost lord by their lamentations.When, soon after, the violent storms and foods were observed, the less doubt was entertained as to the certain destruction of the handsome stranger；and Bertalda openly mourned for him and blamed herself for having allured the unfortunate knight into the forest.Her foster-parents, the duke and duchess, had come to fetch her away, but Bertalda entreated them to remain with her until certain intelligence had been obtained of Huldbrand's fate.She endeavored to prevail upon several young knights, who were eagerly courting her, to follow the noble adventurer to the forest.But she would not pledge her hand as a reward of the enterprise, because she always cherished the hope of belonging tothe returning knight, and no glove, nor riband, nor even kiss, would tempt any one to expose his life for the sake of bringing back such a dangerous rival.

When Huldbrand now suddenly and unexpectedly appeared, his servants. and the inhabitants of the city, and almost every one, rejoiced.Bertalda alone refused to do so；for agreeable as it was to the others that he should bring with him such a beautiful bride, and Father Heilmann as a witness of the marriage, Bertalda could feel nothing but grief and vexation.In the first place, she had really loved the young knight with all her heart, and in the next, her sorrow at his absence had proclaimed this far more before the eyes of all, than was now beftting.She still, however, conducted herself as a wise maiden, reconciled herself to circumstances, and lived on the most friendly terms with Undine, who was looked upon throughout the city as a princess whom Huldbrand had rescued in the forest from some evil enchantment.When she or her husband were questioned on the matter, they were wise enough to be silent or skilfully to evade the inquiries.Father Heilmann's lips were sealed to idle gossip of any kind, and moreover, immediately after Huldbrand's arrival, he had returned to his monastery；so that people were obliged to be satisfied with their own strange conjectures, and even Bertalda herself knew no more of the truth than others.

Day by day, Undine felt her affection increase for the fair maiden.“We must have known each other before，”she often used to say to her，“or else, there must be some mysterious connection between us, for one does not love another as dearly as I haveloved you from the first moment of our meeting without some cause—some deep and secret cause.”And Bertalda also could not deny the fact that she felt drawn to Undine with a tender feeling of confidence, however much she might consider that she had cause for the bitterest lamentation at this successful rival. Biassed by this mutual affection, they both persuaded—the one her foster-parents, the other her husband—to postpone the day of departure from time to time；indeed, it was even proposed that Bertalda should accompany Undine for a time to castle Ringstetten, near the source of the Danube.

They were talking over this plan one beautiful evening, as they were walking by starlight in the large square of the Imperial city, under the tall trees that enclose it. The young married pair had incited Bertalda to join them in their evening walk, and all three were strolling up and down under the dark-blue sky, often interrupting their familiar talk to admire the magnificent fountain in the middle of the square, as its waters rushed and bubbled forth with wonderful beauty.It had a soothing happy influence upon them；between the shadows of the trees there stole glimmerings of light from the adjacent houses；a low murmur of children at play, and of others enjoying their walk, foated around them；they were so alone, and yet in the midst of the bright and living world；whatever had appeared diffcult by day, now became smooth as of itself；and the three friends could no longer understand why the slightest hesitation had existed with regard to Bertalda's visit to Ringstetten.Presently, just as they were on the point of fxing the day for their common departure, a tall man approached them fromthe middle of the square, bowed respectfully to the company, and said something in the ear of the young wife.Displeased as she was at the interruption and its cause, she stepped a little aside with the stranger, and both began to whisper together, as it seemed, in a foreign tongue.Huldbrand fancied he knew the strange man, and he stared so fxedly at him that he neither heard nor answered Bertalda's astonished inquiries.All at once Undine, clapping her hands joyfully, and laughing, quitted the stranger's side, who, shaking his head, retired hastily and discontentedly, and vanished in the fountain.Huldbrand now felt certain on the point, but Bertalda asked：“And what did the master of the fountain want with you, dear Undine?”

The young wife laughed within herself, and replied：“The day after to-morrow, my dear child, on the anniversary of your name-day, you shall know it.”And nothing more would she disclose. She invited Bertalda and sent an invitation to her foster-parents, to dine with them on the appointed day, and soon after they parted.

“Kuhleborn?was it Kuhleborn?”said Huldbrand, with a secret shudder, to his beautiful bride, when they had taken leave of Bertalda, and were now going home through the darkening streets.

“Yes, it was he，”replied Undine，“and he was going to say all sorts of nonsensical things to me. But, in the midst, quite contrary to his intention, he delighted me with a most welcome piece of news.If you wish to hear it at once, my dear lord and husband, you have but to command, and I will tell it you without reserve.But if you would confer a real pleasure on your Undine, you will wait till the day after to-morrow, and you will then have your share too in the surprise.”

The knight gladly complied with his wife's desire, which had been urged so sweetly, and as she fell asleep, she murmured smilingly to herself：“Dear, dear Bertalda！How she will rejoice and be astonished at what her master of the fountain told me！”





CHAPTER XI　THE ANNIVERSARY OF BERTALDA’S NAME-DAY


The company were sitting at dinner；Bertalda, looking like some goddess of spring with her flowers and jewels, the presents of her foster-parents and friends, was placed between Undine and Huldbrand. When the rich repast was ended, and the last course had appeared, the doors were left open, according to a good old German custom, that the common people might look on, and take part in the festivity of the nobles.Servants were carrying round cake and wine among the spectators.Huldbrand and Bertalda were waiting with secret impatience for the promised explanation, and sat with their eyes fxed steadily on Undine.But the beautiful wife still continued silent, and only kept smiling to herself with secret and hearty satisfaction.All who knew of the promise she had given could see that she was every moment on the point of betraying her happy secret, and that it was with a sort of longing renunciation that she withheld it, just as children sometimes delay the enjoyment of their choicest morsels.Bertalda and Huldbrand shared this delightful feeling, and expected with fearful hope the tidings which were to fall from the lips of Undine.Several of the company pressed Undine to sing.The request seemed opportune, and ordering her lute to bebrought, she sang the following words：—

Bright opening day，

Wild flowers so gay，

Tall grasses their thirst that slake，

On the banks of the billowy lake！

What glimmers there so shining

The reedy growth entwining?

Is it a blossom white as snow

Fallen from heav’n here below?

It is an infant, frail and dear！

With flowerets playing in its dreams

And grasping morning’s golden beams；

Oh！whence, sweet stranger, art thou here?

From some far-off and unknown strand，

The lake has borne thee to this land.

Nay, grasp not tender little one，

With thy tiny hand outspread；

No hand will meet thy touch with love，

Mute is that flowery bed.

The flowers can deck themselves so fair

And breathe forth fragrance blest，

Yet none can press thee to itself，

Like that far-off mother’s breast.

So early at the gate of life，

With smiles of heav’n on thy brow，

Thou hast the best of treasures lost，

Poor wand’ring child, nor know’st it now.

A noble duke comes riding by，

And near thee checks his courser’s speed，

And full of ardent chivalry

He bears thee home upon his steed.

Much, endless much, has been thy gain！

Thou bloom’st the fairest in the land！

Yet ah！the priceless joy of all，

Thou’st left upon an unknown strand.

Undine dropped her lute with a melancholy smile, and the eyes of Bertalda's foster-parents were flled with tears.“Yes, so it was on the morning that I found you, my poor sweet orphan，”said the duke, deeply agitated；“the beautiful singer is certainly right；we have not been able to give you thatpriceless joy of all.'”

“But we must also hear how it fared with the poor parents，”said Undine, as she resumed her lute, and sang：—

Thro’every chamber roams the mother，

Moves and searches everywhere，

Seeks, she scarce knows what, with sadness，

And finds an empty house is there.

An empty house！Oh, word of sorrow，

To her who once had been so blest，

Who led her child about by day

And cradled it at night to rest.

The beech is growing green again，

The sunshine gilds its wonted spot，

But mother, cease thy searching vain！

Thy little loved one cometh not.

And when the breath of eve blows cool，

And father in his home appears，

The smile he almost tries to wear

Is quenched at once by gushing tears.

Full well he knows that in his home

He naught can find but wild despair，

He hears the mother’s grieved lament

And no bright infant greets him there.

“Oh！for God's sake, Undine, where are my parents?”cried the weeping Bertalda；“you surely know；you have discovered them, you wonderful being, for otherwise you would not have thus torn meheart. Are they perhaps already here?Can it be?”

Her eyes passed quickly over the brilliant company and lingered on a lady of high rank who was sitting next her foster-father. Undine, however, turned toward the door, while her eyes overfowed with the sweetest emotion.

“Where are the poor waiting parents?”she inquired, and, the old fsherman and his wife advanced hesitatingly from the crowd of spectators. Their glance rested inquiringly now on Undine, now on the beautiful girl who was said to be their daughter“It is she，”said the delighted benefactress, in a faltering tone, and the two old people hung round the neck of their recovered child, weeping and praising God.

But amazed and indignant, Bertalda tore herself from their embrace. Such a recognition was too much for this proud mind, at a moment when she had surely imagined that her former splendor would even be increased, and when hope was deluding her with a vision of almost royal honors.It seemed to her as if her rival had devised all this on purpose signally to humble her before Huldbrand and the whole world.She reviled Undine, she reviled the old people, and bitter invectives, such as“deceiver”and“bribed impostors，”fell from her lips.Then the old fsherman's wife said in a low voice to herself：“Ah me, she is become a wicked girl；and yet I feel in my heart that she is my child.”The old fisherman, however, had folded his hands, and was praying silently that this might not be his daughter.Undine, pale as death, turned with agitation from the parents to Bertalda, and from Bertalda to the parents；suddenly cast down from that heaven of happiness of which she had dreamed, andoverwhelmed with a fear and a terror such as she had never known even in imagination.

“Have you a soul?Have you really a soul, Bertalda?”she cried again and again to her angry friend, as if forcibly to rouse her to consciousness from some sudden delirium or maddening nightmare. But when Bertalda only became more and more enraged, when the repulsed parents began to weep aloud, and the company, in eager dispute, were taking different sides, she begged in such a dignifed and serious manner to be allowed to speak in this her husband's hall, that all around were in a moment silenced.She then advanced to the upper end of the table, where Bertalda has seated herself, and with a modest and yet proud air, while every eye was fxed upon her, she spoke as follows：—

“My friends, you look so angry and disturbed and you have interrupted my happy feast by your disputings. Ah！I knew nothing of your foolish habits and your heartless mode of thinking, and I shall never all my life long become accustomed to them.It is not my fault that this affair has resulted in evil；believe me, the fault is with yourselves alone, little as it may appear to you to be so.I have therefore but little to say to you, but one thing I must say：I have spoken nothing but truth.I neither can nor will give you proofs beyond my own assertion, but I will swear to the truth of this.I received this information from the very person who allured Bertalda into the water, away from her parents, and who afterward placed her on the green meadow in the duke's path.”

“She is an enchantress！”cried Bertalda，“a witch, who has intercourse with evil spirits. She acknowledges it herself.”

“I do not，”said Undine, with a whole heaven innocence and confdence beaming, in her eyes.“I am no witch；only look at me.”

“She is false and boastful，”interrupted Bertalda，“and she cannot prove that I am the child of these low people. My noble parents, I beg you to take me from this company and out of this city, where they are only bent on insulting me.”

But the aged and honorable duke remained unmoved, and his wife, said：“We must thoroughly examine how we are to act. God forbid that we should move a step from this hall until we have done so.”

Then the old wife of the fisherman drew near, and making a low reverence to the duchess, she said：“Noble, god-fearing lady, you have opened my heart. I must tell you, if this evil-disposed young lady is my daughter, she has a mark, like a violet, between her shoulders, and another like it on the instep of her left foot.If she would only go out of the hall with me！”

“I shall not uncover myself before the peasant woman！”exclaimed Bertalda, proudly turning her back on her.

“But before me you will.”rejoined the duchess, very gravely.“Follow me into that room, girl, and the good old woman shall come with us.”

The three disappeared, and the rest of the company remained where they were, in silent expectation. After a short time they returned；Bertalda was pale as death.“Right is right.”said the duchess；“I must therefore declare that our hostess has spoken perfect, truth.Bertalda is the fisherman's daughter, and that is as much as it is necessary to inform you here.”

The princely pair left with their adopted daughter；and at a sign from the duke, the fsherman and his wife followed them. The other guests retired in silence or with secret murmurs, and Undine sank weeping into Huldbrand's arms.





CHAPTER XII　HOW THEY DEPARTED FROM THE IMPERIAL CITY


The lord of Ringstetten would have certainly preferred the events of this day to have been different；but even as they were, he could scarcely regret them wholly, as they had exhibited his charming wife under such a good and sweet and kindly aspect.“If I have given her a soul，”he could not help saying to himself，“I have indeed given her a better one than my own；”and his only thought now was to speak soothingly to the weeping Undine, and on the following morning to quit with her a place which, after this incident, must have become distasteful to her. It is true that she was not estimated differently to what she had been.As something mysterious had long been expected of her, the strange discovery of Bertalda's origin had caused no great surprise, and every one who had heard the story and had seen Bertalda's violent behavior, was disgusted with her alone.Of this, however, the knight and his lady knew nothing as yet；and, besides, the condemnation or approval of the public was equally painful to Undine, and thus there was no better course to pursue than to leave the walls of the old city behind them with all the speed possible.

With the earliest beams of morning a pretty carriage drove upto the entrance gate for Undine：the horses which Huldbrand and his squires were to ride stood near, pawing the ground with impatient eagerness. The knight was leading his beautiful wife from the door, when a fsher-girl crossed their way.

“We do not need your fsh，”said Huldbrand to her，“we are now starting on our journey.”

Upon this the fsher-girl began to weep bitterly, and the young couple perceived for the first time that it was Bertalda. They immediately returned with her to their apartment, and learned from her that the duke and duchess were so displeased at her violent and unfeeling conduct on the preceding way, that they had entirely withdrawn their protection from her, though not without giving her a rich portion.The fsherman, too, had been handsomely rewarded, and had the evening before set out with his wife to return to their secluded home.

“I would have gone with them，”she continued，“but the old fsherman, who is said to be my father”—

“And he is so indeed, Bertalda，”interrupted Undine.“Look here, the stranger, whom you took for the master of the fountain, told me the whole story in detail. He wished to dissuade me from taking you with me to castle Ringstetten, and this led him to disclose the secret.”

“Well, then，”said Bertalda，“if it must be so, my father said，‘I will not take you with me until you are changed. Venture to come to us alone through the haunted forest；that shall be the proof whether you have any regard for us.But do not come to me as a lady；come only as a fsher-girl！'So I will do just as he has told me, for I amforsaken by the whole world, and I will live and die in solitude as a poor fsher-girl, with my poor parents.I have a terrible dread though of the forest.Horrible spectres are said to dwell in it, and I am so fearful.But how can I help it?I only came here to implore pardon of the noble lady of Ringstetten for my unbecoming behavior yesterday.I feel sure, sweet lady, you meant to do me a kindness, but you knew not how you would wound me, and in my agony and surprise, many a rash and frantic expression passed my lips.Oh forgive, forgive！I am already so unhappy.Only think yourself what I was yesterday morning, yesterday at the beginning of your banquet, and what I am now！”

Her voice became stifed with a passionate food of tears, and Undine, also weeping bitterly, fell on her neck. It was some time before the deeply agitated Undine could utter a word；at length she said：—

“You can go with us to Ringstetten；everything shall remain as it was arranged before；only do not speak to me again as‘noble lady.'You see, we were exchanged for each other as children；our faces even then sprang as it were from the same stem, and we will now so strengthen this kindred destiny that no human power shall be able to separate it. Only, frst of all, come with us to Ringstetten.We will discuss there how we shall share all things as sisters.”

Bertalda looked timidly toward Huldbrand. He pitied the beautiful girl in her distress, and offering her his hand he begged her tenderly to intrust herself with him and his wife.

“We will send a message to your parents，”he continued，“to tell them why you are not come；”and he would have added more withregard to the worthy fsherman and his wife, but he saw that Bertalda shrunk with pain from the mention of their name, and he therefore refrained from saying more. He then assisted her first into the carriage, Undine followed her；and he mounted his horse and trotted merrily by the side of them, urging the driver at the same time to hasten his speed, so that very soon they were beyond the confnes of the imperial city and all its sad remembrances；and now the ladies began to enjoy the beautiful country through which their road lay.

After a journey of some days, they arrived one exquisite evening, at castle Ringstetten. The young knight had much to hear from his overseers and vassals, so that Undine and Bertalda were left alone.They both repaired to the ramparts of the fortress, and were delighted with the beautiful landscape which spread far and wide through fertile Swabia.Presently a tall man approached them, greeting them respectfully, and Bertalda fancied she saw a resemblance to the master of the fountain in the imperial city.Still more unmistakable grew the likeness, when Undine angrily and almost threateningly waved him off, and he retreated with hasty steps and shaking head, as he had done before, and disappeared into a neighboring copse.Undine, however, said：

“Don't be afraid, dear Bertalda, this time the hateful master of the fountain shall do you no harm.”

And then she told her the whole story in detail, and who she was herself, and how Bertalda had been taken away from the fsherman and his wife, and Undine had gone to them. The girl was at frst terrifed with this relation；she imagined her friend must be seized with sudden madness, but she became more convinced thatall was true, for Undine's story was so connected, and ftted so well with former occurrences, and still more she had that inward feeling with which truth never fails to make itself known to us.It seemed strange to her that she was now herself living, as it were, in the midst of one of those fairy tales to which she had formerly only listened.She gazed upon Undine with reverence, but she could not resist a sense of dread that seemed to come between her and her friend, and at their evening repast she could not but wonder how the knight could behave so lovingly and kindly toward a being who appeared to her, since the discovery she had just made, more of a phantom than a human being.





CHAPTER XIII　HOW THEY LIVED AT CASTLE RINGSTETTEN


The writer of this story, both because it moves his own heart, and because he wishes it to move that of others, begs you, dear reader, to pardon him, if he now briefy passes over a considerable space of time, only cursorily mentioning the events that marked it. He knows well that he might portray skilfully, step by step, how Huldbrand's heart began to turn from Undine to Bertalda；how Bertalda more and more responded with ardent affection to the young knight, and how they both looked upon the poor wife as a mysterious being rather to be feared than pitied；how Undine wept, and how her tears stung the knight's heart with remorse without awakening his former love, so that though he at times was kind and endearing to her, a cold shudder would soon draw him from her, and he would turn to his fellow-mortal, Bertalda.All this the writer knows might be fully detailed, and perhaps ought to have been so；but such a task would have been too painful, for similar things have been known to him by sad experience, and he shrinks from their shadow even in remembrance.You know probably a like feeling, dear reader, for such is the lot of mortal man.Happy are you if you have received rather than inficted the pain, for in such things it ismore blessed to receive than to give.If it be so, such recollections will only bring a feeling of sorrow to your mind, and perhaps a tear will trickle down your cheek over the faded fowers that once caused you such delight.But let that be enough.We will not pierce our hearts with a thousand separate things, but only briefy state, as I have just said, how matters were.

Poor Undine was very sad, and the other two were not to be called happy. Bertalda especially thought that she could trace the effect of jealousy on the part of the injured wife whenever her wishes were in any way thwarted by her.She had therefore habituated herself to an imperious demeanor, to which Undine yielded in sorrowful submission, and the now blinded Huldbrand usually encouraged this arrogant behavior in the strongest manner.But the circumstance that most of all disturbed the inmates of the castle, was a variety of wonderful apparitions which met Huldbrand and Bertalda in the vaulted galleries of the castle, and which had never been heard of before as haunting the locality.The tall white man, in whom Huldbrand recognized only too plainly Uncle Kuhleborn, and Bertalda the spectral master of the fountain, often passed before them with a threatening aspect, and especially before Bertalda；so much so, that she had already several times been made ill with terror, and had frequently thought of quitting the castle.But still she stayed there, partly because Huldbrand was so dear to her, and she relied on her innocence, no words of love having ever passed between them, and partly also because she knew not whither to direct her steps.The old fsherman, on receiving the message from the lord of Ringstetten that Bertalda was his guest, had written a fewlines in an almost illegible hand, but as good as his advanced age and long dis-would admit of.

“I have now become，”he wrote，“a poor old widower, for my dear and faithful wife is dead. However lonely I now sit in my cottage, Bertalda is better with you than with me.Only let her do nothing to harm my beloved Undine！She will have my curse if it be so.”

The last words of this letter, Bertalda fung to the winds, but she carefully retained the part respecting her absence from her father—just as we are all wont to do in similar circumstances.

One day, when Huldbrand had just ridden out, Undine summoned together the domestics of the family, and ordered them to bring a large stone, and carefully to cover with it the magnifcent fountain which stood in the middle of the castle-yard. The servants objected that it would oblige them to bring water from the valley below.Undine smiled sadly.“I am sorry, my people，”she replied，“to increase your work.I would rather myself fetch up the pitchers, but this fountain must be closed.Believe me that it cannot be otherwise, and that it is only by so doing that we can avoid a greater evil.”

The whole household were glad to be able to please their gentle mistress；they made no further inquiry, but seized the enormous stone. They were just raising it in their hands, and were already poising it over the fountain, when Bertalda came running up, and called out to them to stop, as it was from this fountain that the water was brought which was so good for her complexion, and she would never consent to its being closed.Undine, however, although gentle as usual, was more than usually frm.She told Bertalda that it washer due, as mistress of the house, to arrange her household as she thought best, and that, in this, she was accountable to no one but her lord and husband.

“See, oh, pray see，”exclaimed Bertalda, in an angry, yet uneasy tone，“how the poor beautiful water is curling and writhing at being shut out from the bright sunshine and from the cheerful sight of the human face, for whose mirror it was created！”The water in the fountain was indeed wonderfully agitated and hissing；it seemed as if something within were struggling to free itself, but Undine only the more earnestly urged the fulflment of her orders. The earnestness was scarcely needed.The servants of the castle were as happy in obeying their gentle mistress as in opposing Bertalda's haughty defance；and in spite of all the rude scolding and threatening of the latter the stone was soon firmly lying over the opening of the fountain.Undine leaned thoughtfully over it, and wrote with her beautiful fngers on its surface.She must, however, have had something very sharp and cutting in her hand, for when she turned away, and the servants drew near to examine the stone, they perceived various strange characters upon it, which none of them had seen there before.

Bertalda received the knight, on his return home in the evening, with tears and complaints of Undine's conduct. He cast a serious look at his poor wife, and she looked down as if distressed.Yet she said with great composure：“My lord and husband does not reprove even a bondslave without a hearing, how much less then, his wedded wife?”

“Speak，”said the knight with a gloomy countenance，“what induced you to act so strangely?”

“I should like to tell you when we are quite alone，”sighed Undine.

“You can tell me just as well in Bertalda's presence，”was the rejoinder.

“Yes, if you command me，”said Undine；“but command it not. Oh pray, pray command it not！”

She looked so humble, so sweet, and obedient, that the knight's heart felt a passing gleam from better times. He kindly placed her arm within his own, and led her to his apartment, when she began to speak as follows：—

“You already know, my beloved lord, something of my evil uncle, Kuhleborn, and you have frequently been displeased at meeting him in the galleries of this castle. He has several times frightened Bertalda into illness.This is because he is devoid of soul, a mere elemental mirror of the outward world, without the power of reflecting the world within.He sees, too, sometimes, that you are dissatisfed with me；that I, in my childishness, am weeping at this, and that Bertalda perhaps is at the very same moment laughing.Hence he imagines various discrepancies in our home life, and in many ways mixes unbidden with our circle.What is the good of reproving him?What is the use of sending him angrily away?He does not believe a word I say.His poor nature has no idea that the joys and sorrows of love have so sweet a resemblance, and are so closely linked that no power can separate them.Amid tears a smile shines forth, and a smile allures tears from their secret chambers.”

She looked up at Huldbrand, smiling and weeping；and he again experienced within his heart all the charm of his old love. She feltthis, and pressing him more tenderly to her, she continued amid tears of joy：—

“As the disturber of our peace was not to be dismissed with words, I have been obliged to shut the door upon him. And the only door by which he obtains access to us is that fountain.He is cut off by the adjacent valleys from the other water-spirits in the neighborhood, and his kingdom only commences further off on the Danube, into which some of his good friends direct their course.For this reason I had the stone placed over the opening of the fountain, and I inscribed characters upon it which cripple all my uncle's power, so that he can now neither intrude upon you, nor upon me, nor upon Bertalda.Human beings, it is true, can raise the stone again with ordinary effort, in spite of the characters inscribed on it.The inscription does not hinder them.If you wish, therefore, follow Bertalda's desire, but, truly！she knows not what she asks.The rude Kuhleborn has set his mark especially upon her；and if much came to pass which he has predicted to me, and which might, indeed, happen without your meaning any evil, ah！dear one, even you would then be exposed to danger！”

Huldbrand felt deeply the generosity of his sweet wife, in her eagerness to shut up her formidable protector, while she had even been chided for it by Bertalda. He pressed her in his arms with the utmost affection, and said with emotion：“The stone shall remain, and all shall remain, now and ever, as you wish to have it, my sweet Undine.”

She caressed him with humble delight, as she heard the expressions of love so long withheld, and then at length she said：“My dearest husband, you are so gentle and kind to-day, may I venture to ask a favor of you?See now, it is just the same with you as it is with summer. In the height of its glory, summer puts on the flaming and thundering crown of mighty storms, and assumes the air of a king over the earth.You, too, sometimes, let your fury rise, and your eyes fash and your voice is angry, and this becomes you well, though I, in my folly, may sometimes weep at it.But never, I pray you, behave thus toward me on the water, or even when we are near it.You see, my relatives would then acquire a right over me.They would unrelentingly tear me from you in their rage；because they would imagine that one of their race was injured, and I should be compelled all my life to dwell below in the crystal palaces, and should never dare to ascend to you again；or they would send me up to you—and that, oh God, would be infnitely worse.No, no, my beloved husband, do not let it come to that, if your poor Undine is dear to you.”

He promised solemnly to do as she desired, and they both returned from the apartment, full of happiness and affection. At that moment Bertalda appeared with some workmen, to whom she had already given orders, and said in a sullen tone, which she had assumed of late：“I suppose the secret conference is at an end, and now the stone may be removed.Go out, workmen, and attend to it.”

But the knight, angry at her impertinence, desired in short and very decisive words that the stone should be left：he reproved Bertalda, too, for her violence toward his wife. Whereupon the workmen withdrew, smiling with secret satisfaction：while Bertalda, pale with rage, hurried away to her room.

The hour for the evening repast arrived, and Bertalda they waited for in vain. They sent after her, but the domestic found her apartments empty, and only brought back with him a sealed letter addressed to the knight.He opened it with alarm, and read：“I feel with shame that I am only a poor fsher-girl.I will expiate my fault in having forgotten this for a moment by going to the miserable cottage of my parents.Farewell to you and your beautiful wife.”

Undine was heartily distressed. She earnestly entreated Huldbrand to hasten after their friend and bring her back again.Alas！she had no need to urge him.His affection for Bertalda burst forth again with vehemence.He hurried round the castle, inquiring if any one had seen which way the fugitive had gone.He could learn nothing of her, and he was already on his horse in the castle-yard, resolved at a venture to take the road by which he had brought Bertalda hither.Just then a page appeared, who assured him that he had met the lady on the path to the Black Valley.Like an arrow the knight sprang through the gateway in the direction indicated, without hearing Undine's voice of agony, as she called to him from the window：—

“To the Black Valley！Oh, not there！Huldbrand, don't go there！or, for heaven's sake, take me with you！”

But when she perceived that all her calling was in vain, she ordered her white palfrey to be immediately saddled, and rode after the knight, without allowing any servant to accompany her.





CHAPTER XIV　HOW BERTALDA RETURNED HOME WITH THE KNIGHT


The Black Valley lies deep within the mountains. What it is now called we do not know.At that time the people of the country gave it this appellation on account of the deep obscurity in which the low land lay, owing to the shadows of the lofty trees, and especially firs, that grew there.Even the brook which bubbled between the rocks wore the same dark hue, and dashed along with none of that gladness with which streams are wont to fow that have the blue sky immediately above them.Now, in the growing twilight of evening, it looked wild and gloomy between the heights.The knight trotted anxiously along the edge of the brook, fearful at one moment that by delay he might allow the fugitive to advance too far, and at the next that by too great rapidity he might overlook her in case she were concealing herself from him.Meanwhile he had already penetrated tolerably far into the valley, and might soon hope to overtake the maiden, if he were on the right track.The fear that this might not be the case made his heart beat with anxiety.Where would the tender Bertalda tarry through the stormy night, which was so fearful in the valley, should he fail to find her?At length he saw something white gleaming through the branches on the slope of the mountain.He thought he recognized Bertalda's dress, and he turned his course in that direction.But his horse refused to go forward；it reared impatiently；and its master, unwilling to lose a moment, and seeing moreover that the copse was impassable on horseback, dismounted；and, fastening his snorting steed to an elm-tree, he worked his way cautiously through the bushes.The branches sprinkled his forehead and cheeks with the cold drops of the evening dew；a distant roll of thunder was heard murmuring from the other side of the mountains；everything looked so strange that he began to feel a dread of the white fgure, which now lay only a short distance from him on the ground.Still he could plainly see that it was a female, either asleep or in a swoon, and that she was attired in long white garments, such as Bertalda had worn on that day.He stepped close up to her, made a rustling with the branches, and let his sword clatter, but she moved not.

“Bertalda！”he exclaimed, at first in a low voice, and then louder and louder—still she heard not. At last, when he uttered the dear name with a more powerful effort, a hollow echo from the mountain-caverns of the valley indistinctly reverberated“Bertalda！”but still the sleeper woke not.He bent down over her；the gloom of the valley and the obscurity of approaching night would not allow him to distinguish her features.Just as he was stooping closer over her, with a feeling of painful doubt, a fash of lightning shot across the valley, and he saw before him a frightfully distorted countenance, and a hollow voice exclaimed：“Give me a kiss, you enamoured swain！”

Huldbrand sprang up with a cry of horror, and the hideousfgure rose with him.“Go home！”it murmured；“wizards are on the watch. Go home！or I will have you！”and it stretched out its long white arms toward him.

“Malicious Kuhleborn！”cried the knight, recovering himself，“What do you concern me, you goblin?There, take your kiss！”And he furiously hurled his sword at the fgure. But it vanished like vapor, and a gush of water which wetted him through left the knight no doubt as to the foe with whom he had been engaged.

“He wishes to frighten me back from Bertalda，”said he aloud to himself；“he thinks to terrify me with his foolish tricks, and to make me give up the poor distressed girl to him, so that he can wreak his vengeance on her. But he shall not do that, weak spirit of the elements as he is.No powerless phantom can understand what a human heart can do when its best energies are aroused.”He felt the truth of his words, and that the very expression of them had inspired his heart with fresh courage.It seemed too as if fortune were on his side, for he had not reached his fastened horse, when he distinctly heard Bertalda's plaintive voice not far distant, and could catch her weeping accents through the ever-increasing tumult of the thunder and tempest.He hurried swiftly in the direction of the sound, and found the trembling girl just attempting to climb the steep, in order to escape in any way from the dreadful gloom of the valley.He stepped, however, lovingly in her path, and bold and proud as her resolve had before been, she now felt only too keenly the delight, that the friend whom she so passionately loved should rescue her from this frightful solitude, and that the joyous life in the castle should be again open to her.She followed almost unresisting, but soexhausted with fatigue that the knight was glad to have brought her to his horse, which he now hastily unfastened, in order to lift the fair fugitive upon it；and then, cautiously holding the reins, he hoped to proceed through the uncertain shades of the valley.

But the horse had become quite unmanageable from the wild apparition of Kuhleborn. Even the knight would have had diffculty in mounting the rearing and snorting animal, but to place the trembling Bertalda on its back was perfectly impossible.They determined, therefore, to return home on foot.Drawing the horse after him by the bridle, the knight supported the tottering girl with his other hand.Bertalda exerted all her strength to pass quickly through the fearful valley, but weariness weighed her down like lead, and every limb trembled, partly from the terror she had endured when Kuhleborn had pursued her, and partly from her continued alarm at the howling of the storm and the pealing of the thunder through the wooded mountain.

At last she slid from the supporting arm of her protector, and sinking down on the moss, she exclaimed：“Let me lie here, my noble lord；I suffer the punishment due to my folly, and I must now perish here through weariness and dread.”

“No, sweet friend, I will never leave you！”cried Huldbrand, vainly endeavoring to restrain his furious steed；for, worse than before, it now began to foam and rear with excitement, until at last the knight was glad to keep the animal at a suffcient distance from the exhausted maiden lest her fears should be increased. But scarcely had he withdrawn a few paces with the wild steed, than she began to call after him in the most pitiful manner, believing that he was really goingto leave her in this horrible wilderness.He was utterly at a loss what course to take.Gladly would he have given the excited beast its liberty and have allowed it to rush away into the night and spend its fury, had he not feared that is this narrow defle it might come thundering with its iron-shod hoofs over the very spot where Bertalda lay.

In the midst of this extreme perplexity and distress, he heard with delight the sound of a vehicle driving slowly down the stony road behind them. He called out for help；and a man's voice replied, bidding him have patience, but promising assistance；and soon after, two gray horses appeared through the bushes, and beside them the driver in the white smock of a carter；a great white linen cloth was next visible, covering the goods apparently contained in the wagon.At a loud shout from their master, the obedient horses halted.The driver then came toward the knight, and helped him in restraining his foaming animal.

“I see well，”said he，“what ails the beast. When I frst travelled this way, my horses were no better.The fact is, there is an evil water-spirit haunting the place, and he takes delight in this sort of mischief.But I have learned a charm；if you will let me whisper it in your horse's ear, he will stand at once just as quiet as my gray beasts are doing there.”

“Try your luck then, only help us quickly！”exclaimed the impatient knight. The wagoner then drew down the head of the rearing charger close to his own, and whispered something in his ear.In a moment the animal stood still and quiet, and his quick panting and reeking condition was all that remained of his previous unmanageableness.Huldbrand had no time to inquire how all thishad been effected.He agreed with the carter that he should take Bertalda on his wagon, where, as the man assured him, there were a quantity of soft cotton-bales, upon which she could be conveyed to castle Ringstetten, and the knight was to accompany them on horseback.But the horse appeared too much exhausted by its past fury to be able to carry its master so far, so the carter persuaded Huldbrand to get into the wagon with Bertalda.The horse could be fastened on behind.

“We are going down hill，”said he，“and that will make it light for my gray beasts.”The knight accepted the offer and entered the wagon with Bertalda；the horse followed patiently behind, and the wagoner, steady and attentive, walked by the side.

In the stillness of the night, as its darkness deepened and the subsiding tempest sounded more and more remote, encouraged by the sense of security and their fortunate escape, a confidential conversation arose between Huldbrand and Bertalda. With fattering words he reproached her for her daring fight；she excused herself with humility and emotion, and from every word she said a gleam shone forth which disclosed distinctly to the lover that the beloved was his.The knight felt the sense of her words far more than he regarded their meaning, and it was the sense alone to which he replied.Presently the wagoner suddenly shouted with loud voice，—

“Up, my grays, up with your feet, keep together！remember who you are！”

The knight leaned out of the wagon and saw that the horses were stepping into the midst of a foaming stream or were already almost swimming, while the wheels of the wagon were rushinground and gleaming like mill-wheels, and the wagoner had got up in front, in consequence of the increasing waters.

“What sort of a road is this?It goes into the middle of the stream.”cried Huldbrand to his guide.

“Not at all, sir.”returned the other, laughing，“it is just the reverse, the stream goes into the very middle of our road. Look round and see how everything is covered by the water.”The whole valley indeed was suddenly flled with the surging food, that visibly increased.

“It is Kuhleborn, the evil water-spirit, who wishes to drown us！”exclaimed the knight.“Have you no charm, against him, my friend?”“I know indeed of one，”returned the wagoner，“but I cannot and may not use it until you know who I am.”“Is this a time for riddles?”cried the knight.“The food is ever rising higher, and what does it matter to me to know who you are?”

“It does matter to you, though，”said the wagoner，“for I am Kuhleborn.”So saying, he thrust his distorted face into the wagon with a grin, but the wagon was a wagon no longer, the horses were not horses—all was transformed to foam and vanished in the hissing waves, and even the wagoner himself, rising as a gigantic billow, drew down the vainly struggling horse beneath the waters, and then swelling higher and higher, swept over the heads of the foating pair, like some liquid tower, threatening to bury them irrecoverably.

Just then the soft voice of Undine sounded through the uproar, the moon emerged from the clouds, and by its light Undine was seen on the heights above the valley. She rebuked, she threatened the floods below；the menacing, tower-like wave vanished, mutteringand murmuring, the waters flowed gently away in the moonlight, and like a white dove, Undine flew down from the height, seized the knight and Bertalda, and bore them with her to a fresh, green, turfy spot on the hill, where with choice refreshing restoratives, she dispelled their terrors and weariness；then she assisted Bertalda to mount the white palfrey, on which she had herself ridden here, and thus all three returned back to castle Ringstetten.





CHAPTER XV　THE JOURNEY TO VIENNA


After this last adventure, they lived quietly and happily at the castle. The knight more and more perceived the heavenly goodness of his wife, which had been so nobly exhibited by her pursuit, and by her rescue of them in the Black Valley, where Kuhleborn's power again commenced；Undine herself felt that peace and security, which is never lacking to a mind so long as it is distinctly conscious of being on the right path, and besides, in the newly-awakened love and esteem of her husband, many a gleam of hope and joy shone upon her.Bertalda, on the other hand, showed herself grateful, humble and timid, without regarding her conduct as anything meritorious.Whenever Huldbrand or Undine were about to give her any explanation regarding the covering of the fountain or the adventure in the Black Valley, she would earnestly entreat them to spare her the recital, as she felt too much shame at the recollection of the fountain, and too much fear at the remembrance of the Black Valley.She learned therefore nothing further of either；and for what end was such knowledge necessary?Peace and joy had visibly taken up their abode at castle Ringstetten.They felt secure on this point, and imagined that life could now produce nothing but pleasant fowers and fruits.

In this happy condition of things, winter had come and passed away, and spring, with its fresh green shoots and its blue sky, was gladdening the joyous inmates of the castle. Spring was in harmony with them, and they with spring.What wonder then, that its storks and swallows inspired them also with a desire to travel?

One day when they were taking a pleasant walk to one of the sources of the Danube, Huldbrand spoke of the magnificence of the noble river, and how it widened as it fowed through countries fertilized by its waters, how the charming city of Vienna shone forth on its banks, and how with every step of its course it increased in power and loveliness.

“It must be glorious to go down the river as far as Vienna！”exclaimed Bertalda, but immediately relapsing into her present modesty and humility, she paused and blushed deeply.

This touched Undine deeply, and with the liveliest desire to give pleasure to her friend, she said：“What hinders us from starting on the little voyage?”

Bertalda exhibited the greatest delight, and both she and Undine began at once to picture the tour of the Danube in the brightest colors. Huldbrand also gladly agreed to the prospect；only he once whispered anxiously in Undine's ear，—

“But Kuhleborn becomes possessed of his power again out there！”

“Let him come，”she replied with a smile，“I shall be there, and he ventures upon none of his mischief before me.”

The last impediment was thus removed；they prepared for the journey, and soon after set out upon it with fresh spirits and thebrightest hopes.

But wonder not, oh man, if events always turn out different to what we have intended. That malicious power, lurking for our destruction, gladly lulls its chosen victim to sleep with sweet songs and golden delusions；while on the other hand the rescuing messenger from Heaven often knocks sharply and alarmingly at our door.

During the first few days of their voyage down the Danube they were extremely happy. Everything grew more and more beautiful as they sailed further and further down the proudly fowing stream.But in a region otherwise so pleasant, and in the enjoyment of which they had promised themselves the purest delight, the ungovernable Kuhleborn began, undisguisedly, to exhibit his power of interference.This was indeed manifested in mere teasing tricks, for Undine often rebuked the agitated waves, or the contrary winds, and then the violence of the enemy would be immediately humbled；but again the attacks would be renewed, and again Undine's reproofs would become necessary, so that the pleasure of the little party was completely destroyed.

The boatmen too were continually whispering to each other in dismay, and looking with distrust at the three strangers, whose servants even began more and more to forebode something uncomfortable, and to watch their superiors with suspicious glances. Huldbrand often said to himself：“This comes from like not being linked with like, from a man uniting himself with a mermaid！”Excusing himself as we all love to do, he would often think indeed as he said this：“I did not really know that she was a sea-maiden, mine is the misfortune, that every step I take is disturbed andhaunted by the wild caprices of her race, but mine is not the fault.”

By thoughts such as these, he felt himself in some measure strengthened, but on the other hand, he felt increasing ill-humor, and almost animosity toward Undine. He would look at her with an expression of anger, the meaning of which the poor wife understood well.Wearied with this exhibition of displeasure, and exhausted by the constant effort to frustrate Kuhleborn's artifices, she sank one evening into a deep slumber, rocked soothingly by the softly gliding bark.

Scarcely, however, had she closed her eyes than every one in the vessel imagined he saw, in whatever direction he turned, a most horrible human head；it rose out of the waves, not like that of a person swimming, but perfectly perpendicular as if invisibly supported upright on the watery surface, and floating along in the same course with the bark. Each wanted to point out to the other the cause of his alarm, but each found the same expression of horror depicted on the face of his neighbor, only that his hands and eyes were directed to a different point where the monster, half-laughing and half-threatening, rose before him.When, however, they all wished to make each other understand what each saw, and all were crying out：“Look there！No, there！”the horrible heads all at one and the same time appeared to their view, and the whole river around the vessel swarmed with the most hideous apparitions.The universal cry raised at the sight awoke Undine.As she opened her eyes, the wild crowd of distorted visages disappeared.But Huldbrand was indignant at such unsightly jugglery.He would have burst forth in uncontrolled imprecations had not Undine said to him with a humblemanner and a softly imploring tone：“For God's sake, my husband, we are on the water, do not be angry with me now.”

The knight was silent, and sat down absorbed in revery. Undine whispered in his ear：“Would it not be better, my love, if we gave up this foolish journey, and returned to castle Ringstetten in peace?”

But Huldbrand murmured moodily：“So I must be a prisoner in my own castle, and only be able to breathe so long as the fountain is closed！I would your mad kindred”—

Undine lovingly pressed her fair hand upon his lips. He paused, pondering in silence over much that Undine had before said to him.Bertalda had meanwhile given herself up to a variety of strange thoughts.She knew a good deal of Undine's origin, and yet not the whole, and the fearful Kuhleborn especially had remained to her a terrible but wholly unrevealed mystery.She had indeed never even heard his name.Musing on these strange things, she unclasped, scarcely conscious of the act, a gold necklace, which Huldbrand had lately purchased for her of a travelling trader；half dreamingly she drew it along the surface of the water, enjoying the light glimmer it cast upon the evening-tinted stream.Suddenly a huge hand was stretched out of the Danube, it seized the necklace and vanished with it beneath the waters.Bertalda screamed aloud, and a scornful laugh resounded from the depths of the stream.The knight could now restrain his anger no longer.Starting up, he inveighed against the river；he cursed all who ventured to interfere with his family and his life, and challenged them, be they spirits or sirens, to show themselves before his avenging sword.Bertalda wept meanwhile for her lost ornament, which was so precious to her, and her tearsadded fuel to the flame of the knight's anger, while Undine held her hand over the side of the vessel, dipping it into the water, softly murmuring to herself, and only now and then interrupting her strange mysterious whisper, as she entreated her husband：“My dearly loved one, do not scold me here；reprove others if you will, but not me here.You know why！”

And indeed, he restrained the words of anger that were trembling on his tongue. Presently in her wet hand which she had been holding under the waves, she brought up a beautiful coral necklace of so much brilliancy that the eyes of all were dazzled by it.

“Take this，”said she, holding it out kindly to Bertalda；“I have ordered this to be brought for you as a compensation, and don't be grieved any more, my poor child.”

But the knight sprang between them. He tore the beautiful ornament from Undine's hand, hurled it again into the river, exclaiming in passionate rage：“Have you then still a connection with them?In the name of all the witches, remain among them with your presents, and leave us mortals in peace, you sorceress！”

Poor Undine gazed at him with fxed but tearful eyes, her hand still stretched out, as when she had offered her beautiful present so lovingly to Bertalda. She then began to weep more and more violently, like a dear innocent child bitterly afficted.At last, wearied out she said：

“Alas, sweet friend, alas！farewell！They shall do you no harm；only remain true, so that I may be able to keep them from you. I must, alas！go away；I must go hence at this early stage of life.Ohwoe, woe！what have you done！Oh woe, woe！”

She vanished over the side of the vessel. Whether she plunged into the stream, or flowed away with it, they knew not；her disappearance was like both and neither.Soon, however, she was completely lost sight of in the Danube；only a few little waves kept whispering, as if sobbing, round the boat, and they almost seemed to be saying：“Oh woe, woe！oh remain true！oh woe！”

Huldbrand lay on the deck of the vessel, bathed in hot tears, and a deep swoon soon cast its veil of forgetfulness over the unhappy man.





CHAPTER XVI　HOW IT FARED FURTHER WITH HULDBRAND


Shall we say it is well or ill, that our sorrow is of such short duration?I mean that deep sorrow which affects the very well-spring of our life, which becomes so one with the lost objects of our love that they are no longer lost, and which enshrines their image as a sacred treasure, until that fnal goal is reached which they have reached before us！It is true that many men really maintain these sacred memories, but their feeling is no longer that of the frst deep grief. Other and new images have thronged between；we learn at length the transitoriness of all earthly things, even to our grief, and, therefore.I must say：“Alas, that our sorrow should be of such short duration?”

The lord of Ringstetten experienced this whether for his good, we shall hear in the sequel to this history. At frst he could do nothing but weep, and that as bitterly as the poor gentle Undine had wept when he had torn from her hand that brilliant ornament with which she had wished to set everything to rights.And then he would stretch out his hand, as she had done, and would weep again, like her.He cherished the secret hope that he might at length dissolve in tears；and has not a similar hope passed before the mind of manya one of us, with painful pleasure, in moments of great affliction?Bertalda wept also, and they lived a long while quietly together at Castle Ringstetten, cherishing Undine's memory, and almost wholly forgetful of their former attachment to each other.And, therefore, the good Undine often visited Huldbrand in his dreams；caressing him tenderly and kindly, and then going away, weeping silently, so that when he awoke he often scarcely knew why his cheeks were so wet；whether they had been bathed with her tears, or merely with his own?

These dream-visions became, however, less frequent as time passed on, and the grief of the knight was less acute；still he would probably have cherished no other wish than thus to think calmly of Undine and to talk of her, had not the old fsherman appeared one day unexpectedly at the castle, and sternly insisted on Bertalda's returning with him as his child. The news of Undine's disappearance had reached him, and he had determined on no longer allowing Bertalda to reside at the castle with the widowed knight.“For，”said he，“whether my daughter love me or no, I do not care to know, but her honor is at stake, and where that is concerned, nothing else is to be thought of.”

This idea of the old fisherman's, and the solitude which threatened to overwhelm the knight in all the halls and galleries of the desolate castle, after Bertalda's departure, brought out the feelings that had slumbered till now and which had been wholly forgotten in his sorrow for Undine；namely, Huldbrand's affection for the beautiful Bertalda. The fisherman had many objections to raise against the proposed marriage.Undine had been very dear to the old fisherman, and he felt that no one really knew for certainwhether the dear lost one were actually dead.And if her body were truly lying cold and stiff at the bottom of the Danube, or had foated away with the current into the ocean, even then Bertalda was in some measure to blame for her death, and it was unftting for her to step into the place of the poor supplanted one.Yet the fsherman had a strong regard for the knight also；and the entreaties of his daughter, who had become much more gentle and submissive, and her tears for Undine, turned the scale, and he must at length have given his consent, for he remained at the castle without objection, and a messenger was despatched to Father Heilmann, who had united Undine and Huldbrand in happy days gone by, to bring him to the castle for the second nuptials of the knight.

The holy man, however, had scarcely read the letter from the knight of Ringstetten, than he set out on his journey to the castle, with far greater expedition than even the messenger had used in going to him. Whenever his breath failed in his rapid progress, or his aged limbs ached with weariness, he would say to himself：“Perhaps the evil may yet be prevented；fail not, my tottering frame, till you have reached the goal！”And with renewed power he would then press forward, and go on and on without rest or repose, until late one evening he entered the shady court-yard of castle Ringstetten.

The betrothed pair were sitting side by side under the trees, and the old fsherman was near them, absorbed in thought. The moment they recognized Father Heilmann, they sprang up, and pressed round him with warm welcome.But he, without making much reply, begged Huldbrand to go with him into the castle；and when the latter looked astonished, and hesitated to obey the grave summons, thereverend father said to him：—

“Why should I make any delay in wishing to speak to you in private, Herr von Ringstetten?What I have to say concerns Bertalda and the fisherman as much as yourself, and what a man has to hear, he may prefer to hear as soon as possible. Are you then so perfectly certain, Knight Huldbrand, that your first wife is really dead?It scarcely seems so to me.I will not indeed say anything of the mysterious condition in which she may be existing, and I know, too, nothing of it with certainty.But she was a pious and faithful wife, that is beyond all doubt；and for a fortnight past she has stood at my bedside at night in my dreams, wringing her tender hands in anguish and sighing out：‘Oh, prevent him, good father！I am still living！oh, save his life！save his soul！'I did not understand what this nightly vision signifed；when presently your messenger came, and I hurried thither, not to unite, but to separate, what ought not to be joined together.Leave her, Huldbrand！Leave him, Bertalda！He yet belongs to another；and do you not see grief for his lost wife still written on his pale cheek?No bridegroom looks thus, and a voice tells me that if you do not leave him, you will never be happy.”

The three listeners felt in their innermost heart that Father Heilmann spoke the truth, but they would not believe it. Even the old fsherman was now so infatuated that he thought it could not be otherwise than they had settled it in their discussions during the last few days.They therefore all opposed the warnings of the priest with a wild and gloomy rashness, until at length the holy father quitted the castle with a sad heart, refusing to accept even for a single night the shelter offered, or to enjoy the refreshments brought him.Huldbrand, however, persuaded himself that the priest was full of whims and fancies, and with dawn of day he sent for a father from the nearest monastery, who, without hesitation, promised to perform the ceremony in a few days.





CHAPTER XVII　THE KNIGHT’S DREAM


It was between night and dawn of day that the knight was lying on his couch, half-waking, half-sleeping. Whenever he was on the point of falling asleep a terror seemed to come upon him and scare his rest away, for his slumbers were haunted with spectres.If he tried, however, to rouse himself in good earnest he felt fanned as by the wings of a swan, and he heard the soft murmuring of waters, until soothed by the agreeable delusion, he sunk back again into a half-conscious state.At length he must have fallen sound asleep, for it seemed to him as if he were lifted up upon the fluttering wings of the swans and borne by them far over land and sea, while they sang to him their sweetest music.“The music of the swan！the music of the swan！”he kept saying to himself；“does it not always portend death?”But it had yet another meaning.All at once he felt as if he were hovering over the Mediterranean Sea.A swan was singing musically in his ear that this was the Mediterranean Sea.And while he was looking down upon the waters below they became clear as crystal, so that he could see through them to the bottom.He was delighted at this, for he could see Undine sitting beneath the crystal arch.It is true she was weeping bitterly, and looking much sadder than in the happy days when they had lived togetherat the castle of Ringstetten, especially at their commencement, and afterward also, shortly before they had begun their unhappy Danube excursion.The knight could not help thinking upon all this very fully and deeply, but it did not seem as if Undine perceived him.Meanwhile Kuhleborn had approached her, and was on the point of reproving her for her weeping.But she drew herself up, and looked at him with such a noble and commanding air that he almost shrunk back with fear.“Although I live here beneath the waters，”said she，“I have yet brought down my soul with me；and therefore I may well weep, although you can not divine what such tears are.They too are blessed, for everything is blessed to him in whom a true soul dwells.”He shook his head incredulously, and said, after some refection：“And yet, niece, you are subject to the laws of our element, and if he marries again and is unfaithful to you, you are in duty bound to take away his life.”“He is a widower to this very hour，”replied Undine，“and his sad heart still holds me dear.”“He is, however, at the same time betrothed，”laughed Kuhleborn, with scorn；“and let only a few days pass, and the priest will have given the nuptial blessing, and then you will have to go upon earth to accomplish the death of him who has taken another to wife.”“That I cannot do，”laughed Undine in return；“I have sealed up the fountain securely against myself and my race.”“But suppose he should leave his castle，”said Kuhleborn，“or should have the fountain opened again！for he thinks little enough of these things.”“It is just for that reason，”said Undine, still smiling amid her tears，“it is just for that reason, that he is now hovering in spirit over the Mediterranean Sea, and is dreaming of this conversation of ours as a warning.I haveintentionally arranged it so.”Kuhleborn, furious with rage, looked up at the knight, threatened, stamped with his feet, and then swift as an arrow shot under the waves.It seemed as if he were swelling in his fury to the size of a whale.Again the swans began to sing, to fap their wings, and to fy.It seemed to the knight as if he were soaring away over mountains and streams, and that he at length reached the castle Ringstetten, and awoke on his couch.

He did, in reality, awake upon his couch, and his squire coming in at that moment informed him that Father Heilmann was still lingering in the neighborhood；that he had met him the night before in the forest, in a hut which he had formed for himself of the branches of trees, and covered with moss and brushwood. To the question what he was doing here, since he would not give the nuptial blessing, he had answered：“There are other blessings besides those at the nuptial altar, and though I have not gone to the wedding, it may be that I shall be at another solemn ceremony.We must be ready for all things.Besides, marrying and mourning are not so unlike, and every one not wilfully blinded must see that well.”

The knight placed various strange constructions upon these words, and upon his dream, but it is very difficult to break off a thing which a man has once regarded as certain, and so everything remained as it had been arranged.





CHAPTER XVIII　HOW THE KNIGHT HULDBRAND IS MARRIED


If I were to tell you how the marriage-feast passed at castle Ringstetten, it would seem to you as if you saw a heap of bright and pleasant things, but a gloomy veil of mourning spread over them all, the dark hue of which would make the splendor of the whole look less like happiness than a mockery of the emptiness of all earthly joys. It was not that any spectral apparitions disturbed the festive company, for we know that the castle had been secured from the mischief of the threatening water-spirits.But the knight and the fsherman and all the guests felt as if the chief personage were still lacking at the feast, and that this chief personage could be none other than the loved and gentle Undine.Whenever a door opened, the eyes of all were involuntarily turned in that direction, and if it was nothing but the butler with new dishes, or the cup-bearer with a fask of still richer wine, they would look down again sadly, and the fashes of wit and merriment which had passed to and fro, would be extinguished by sad remembrances.The bride was the most thoughtless of all, and therefore the most happy；but even to her it sometimes seemed strange that she should be sitting at the head of the table, wearing a green wreath and gold-embroidered attire, while Undine was lying at the bottom of the Danube, a cold and stiff corpse, or foating away with the current into the mighty ocean.For, ever since her father had spoken of something of the sort, his words were ever ringing in her ear, and this day especially they were not inclined to give place to other thoughts.

The company dispersed early in the evening, not broken up by the bridegroom himself, but sadly and gloomily by the joyless mood of the guests and their forebodings of evil. Bertalda retired with her maidens, and the knight with his attendants；but at this mournful festival there was no gay, laughing train of bridesmaids and bridesmen.

Bertalda wished to arouse more cheerful thoughts；she ordered a splendid ornament of jewels which Huldbrand had given her, together with rich apparel and veils, to be spread out before her, in order that from these latter she might select the brightest and most beautiful for her morning attire. Her attendants were delighted at the opportunity of expressing their good wishes to their young mistress, not failing at the same time to extol the beauty of the bride in the most lively terms.They were more and more absorbed in these considerations, till Bertalda at length, looking in a mirror, said with a sigh：“Ah, but don't you see plainly how freckled I am growing here at the side of my neck?”

They looked at her throat, and found the freckles as their fair mistress had said, but they called them beauty-spots, and mere tiny blemishes only, tending to enhance the whiteness of her delicate skin. Bertalda shook her head and asserted that a spot was always a defect.

“And I could remove them，”she sighed a last，“only the fountain is closed from which I used to have that precious and purifying water. Oh！if I had but a fask of it to-day！”

“Is that all?”said an alert waiting-maid, laughing, as she slipped from the apartment.

“She will not be mad，”exclaimed Bertalda, in a pleased and surprised tone，“she will not be so mad as to have the stone removed from the fountain this very evening！”At the same moment they heard the men crossing the courtyard, and could see from the window how the officious waiting-woman was leading them straight up to the fountain, and that they were carrying levers and other instruments on their shoulders.“It is certainly my will，”said Bertalda, smiling，“if only it does not take too long.”And, happy in the sense that a look from her now was able to effect what had formerly been so painfully refused her, she watched the progress of the work in the moonlit castle-court.

The men raised the enormous stone with an effort；now and then indeed one of their number would sigh, as he remembered that they were destroying the work of their former beloved mistress. But the labor was far lighter than they had imagined.It seemed as if a power within the spring itself were aiding them in raising the stone.“It is just，”said the workmen to each other in astonishment，“as if the water within had become a springing fountain.”And the stone rose higher and higher, and almost without the assistance of the workmen, it rolled slowly down upon the pavement with a hollow sound.But from the opening of the fountain there rose solemnly a white column of water；at frst they imagined it had really become aspringing fountain, till they perceived that the rising form was a pale female fgure veiled in white.She was weeping bitterly, raising her hands wailingly above her head and wringing them, as she walked with a slow and serious step to the castle-building.The servants fed from the spring；the bride, pale and stiff with horror, stood at the window with her attendants.When the figure had now come close beneath her room, it looked moaningly up to her, and Bertalda thought she could recognize beneath the veil the pale features of Undine.But the sorrowing form passed on, sad, reluctant, and faltering, as if passing to execution.Bertalda screamed out that the knight was to be called, but none of her maids ventured from the spot；and even the bride herself became mute, as if trembling at her own voice.

While they were still standing fearfully at the window, motionless as statues, the strange wanderer had reached the castle, had passed up the well-known stairs, and through the well-known halls, ever in silent tears. Alas！how differently had she once wandered through them！

The knight, partly undressed, had already dismissed his attendants, and in a mood of deep dejection he was standing before a large mirror；a taper was burning dimly beside him. There was a gentle tap at his door.Undine used to tap thus when she wanted playfully to tease him“It is all fancy，”said he to himself；“I must seek my nuptial bed.”

“So you must, but it must be a cold one！”he heard a tearful voice say from without, and then he saw in the mirror his door opening slowly—slowly—and the white figure entered, carefullyclosing it behind her.“They have opened the spring，”said she softly，“and now I am here, and you must die.”

He felt in his paralyzed heart that it could not be otherwise, but covering his eyes with his hands he said：“Do not make me mad with terror in my hour of death. If you wear a hideous face behind that veil, do not raise it, but take my life, and let me see you not.”

“Alas！”replied the figure，“will you then not look upon me once more?I am as fair as when you wooed me on the promontory.”

“Oh, if it were so！”sighed Huldbrand，“and if I might die in your fond embrace！”

“Most gladly, my loved one，”said she；and throwing her veil back, her lovely face smiled forth divinely beautiful.

Trembling with love and with the approach of death, she kissed him with a holy kiss；but not relaxing her hold she pressed him fervently to her, and as if she would weep away her soul. Tears rushed into the knight's eyes, and seemed to surge through his heaving breast, till at length his breathing ceased, and he fell softly back from the beautiful arms of Undine, upon the pillows of his couch—a corpse.

“I have wept him to death，”said she to some servants who met her in the ante-chamber；and, passing through the affrighted group, she went slowly out toward the fountain.





CHAPTER XIX　HOW THE KNIGHT HULDBRAND WAS BURIED


Father Heilmann had returned to the castle as soon as the death of the lord of Ringstetten had been made known in the neighborhood, and he appeared at the very same moment that the monk who had married the unfortunate couple was feeing from the gates overwhelmed with fear and terror.

“It is well，”replied Heilmann, when he was informed of this；“now my duties begin, and I need no associate.”Upon this he began to console the bride, now a widow, small result as it produced upon her worldly thoughtless mind. The old fsherman, on the other hand, although heartily grieved, was far more resigned to the fate which had befallen his daughter and son-in-law, and while Bertalda could not refrain from abusing Undine as a murderess and sorceress, the old man calmly said：“It could not be otherwise after all；I see nothing in it but the judgment of God, and no one's heart has been more deeply grieved by Huldbrand's death than that of her by whom it was inflicted—the poor forsaken Undine！”At the same time he assisted in arranging the funeral solemnities as beftted the rank of the deceased.The knight was to be interred in the village churchyard which was flled with the graves of his ancestors.And this churchhad been endowed with rich privileges and gifts both by these ancestors and by himself.His shield and helmet lay already on the coffin, to be lowered with it into the grave, for Sir Huldbrand, of Ringstetten, had died the last of his race；the mourners began their sorrowful march, singing requiems under the bright, calm canopy of heaven；Father Heilmann walked in advance, bearing a high crucifx, and the inconsolable Bertalda followed, supported by her aged father.Suddenly, in the midst of the black-robed attendants in the widow's train, a snow-white fgure was seen, closely veiled, and wringing her hands with fervent sorrow.Those near whom she moved felt a secret dread, and retreated either backward or to the side, increasing by their movements the alarm of the others near to whom the white stranger was now advancing, and thus a confusion in the funeral-train was well-nigh beginning.Some of the military escort were so daring as to address the figure, and to attempt to remove it from the procession；but she seemed to vanish from under their hands, and yet was immediately seen advancing again amid the dismal cortege with slow and solemn step.At length, in consequence of the continued shrinking of the attendants to the right and to the left, she came close behind Bertalda.The figure now moved so slowly that the widow did not perceive it, and it walked meekly and humbly behind her undisturbed.

This lasted till they came to the churchyard, where the procession formed a circle round the open grave. Then Bertalda saw her unbidden companion, and starting up half in anger and half in terror, she commanded her to leave the knight's last resting-place.The veiled figure, however, gently shook her head in refusal, andraised her hands as if in humble supplication to Bertalda, deeply agitating her by the action, and recalling to her with tears how Undine had so kindly wished to give her that coral necklace on the Danube.Father Heilmann motioned with his hand and commanded silence, as they were to pray in mute devotion over the body, which they were now covering with the earth.Bertalda knelt silently, and all knelt, even the grave-diggers among the rest, when they had fnished their task.But when they rose again, the white stranger had vanished；on the spot where she had knelt there gushed out of the turf a little silver spring, which rippled and murmured away till it had almost entirely encircled the knight's grave；then it ran further and emptied itself into a lake which lay by the side of the burial-place.Even to this day the inhabitants of the village show the spring, and cherish the belief that it is the poor rejected Undine, who in this manner still embraces her husband in her loving arms.





引子


引子里面绝无要紧话，爱听故事不爱听空谈诸君，可以不必白费时光，从第一章看起就是。

我一年前看了“Undine”（涡堤孩）那段故事以后，非但很感动，并觉其结构文笔并极精妙，当时就想可惜我和母亲不在一起，否则若然我随看随讲，她一定很乐意听。此次偶尔兴动，一口气将它翻了出来，如此母亲虽在万里外不能当面听我讲，也可以看我的译文。译笔很是粗忽，老实说我自己付印前一遍都不曾复看，其中错讹的字句，一定不少，这是我要道歉的一点。其次因为我原意是给母亲看的，所以动笔的时候，就以她看得懂与否作标准，结果南腔北调杂格得很，但是她看我知道恰好，如其这故事能有幸传出我家庭以外，我不得不为译笔之芜杂道歉。

这篇故事，算是西欧文学里有名的浪漫事（Romance）之一。大陆上有乐剧（Undine opera），英国著名剧评家W.L.Courtney将这故事编成三幕的剧本。此外英译有两种，我现在翻的是高斯（Edmund Gosse）的译本[1]。高斯自身是近代英国文学界里一个重要分子，他还活着。他是一诗人，但是他文学评论家的身份更高。他读书之多、学识之博，与Edward Dowden和George Saintsbury齐名，他们三人的评论，都是渊源于19世纪评坛大师法人圣佩韦（Sainte-Beuve），而高斯文笔之条畅精美，尤在Dowden之上，（Saintsbury文学知识浩如烟海，英法文学，几于全欧文学，彼直一气吸尽，然其文字殊晦涩，读者皆病之。）其Undine译文，算是译界难得之佳构，惜其书已绝版耳。

高斯译文前有一长篇La Motte Funqué的研究，讲他在德文学界的位置及其事略，我懒得翻，简要一提就算。

这段故事作者的完全名字是Friedrich Heinrich Karl, Baron de la Fouqué，我现在简称他为福凯，他生在德国，祖先是法国的贵族。他活了65岁，从1777年到1843年。

他生平只有两样嗜好——当兵的荣耀和写浪漫的故事。他自己就是个浪漫人。

他的职业是军官，但他文学的作品，戏曲、诗、小说、报章文字等类，也着实可观，不过大部分都是不相干的，他在文学界的名气，全靠三四个浪漫事——Sintram, Der Zauberring, Thiodulfs, Undine，末了一个尤其重要。

福凯算是19世纪浪漫派最后也是最纯粹的一个作者。他谨守浪漫派的壁垒，丝毫不让步，人家都叫他Don Quixote。他总是全身军服，带着腰剑，顾盼自豪，时常骑了高头大马，在柏林大街上出风头。他最崇拜战争，爱国。他曾说：“打仗是大丈夫精神身体的唯一完美真正职业。”岂不可笑？

他的Undine是1811年出版。那故事的来源，是希腊神话和中世纪迷信。歌德（Goethe）曾经将水火木土四原行假定作人，叫火为Salamander，水为Undine，木为Sylphe，土为Kobold。福凯就借用Undine，以及Melusine和Lohengirn（Wagners Opera，瓦格纳著名的乐剧）的神话关联起来写成这段故事。那大音乐家瓦格纳很看重福凯，他临死那一晚，手里还拿着一本Undine。

福凯发表了这篇故事，声名大震，一霎时Undine传遍全欧，英、法、意、俄不久都有译文。歌德和席勒都认识福凯，他们不很注意他的诗文。但是歌德读了Undine，大为称赞，说可怜的福凯这回居然撞着了纯金。海涅（Heine，大诗家）平常对福凯也很冷淡，但是这一次也出劲地赞美。他说Undine是一篇非常可爱的诗：“此是真正接吻；诗的天才和眠之春接吻，春开眼一笑，所有的蔷薇玫瑰，一齐呼出最香的气息，所有的黄莺一齐唱起他们最甜的歌儿——这是我们优美的福凯怀抱在他文字里的情景，叫作涡堤孩。”

所以这篇故事虽然情节荒唐，身份却是很高，曾经瓦格纳崇拜，歌德称羡，海涅鼓掌，又有人制成乐，编成剧，各国都有译本，现在所翻的又是高斯的手笔——就是我的译手太不像样罢了。

现今国内思想进步，各事维新，在文学界内大众注意的是什么自然主义、象征主义、将来主义、新浪漫主义，也许还有立方主义、球形主义，怪不得连罗素都啧啧称赞说中国少年的思想真敏锐前进，比日本人强多了（他亲口告诉我的，但不知道他这话里有没有Irony，我希望没有）。在这样一日万里情形之下，忽然出现了一篇稀旧荒谬的浪漫事，人家不要笑话吗？但是我声明在前，我译这篇东西本来不敢妄想高明文学先生寓目；我想世界上不见得全是聪明人，像我这样旧式腐败的脾胃，也不见得独一无二，所以胆敢将这段译文付印——至少我母亲总会领情的。





涡堤孩新婚歌


徐志摩

小溪儿碧冷冷，

笑盈盈讲新闻，

青草地里打滚，

不负半点儿责任；

砂块儿疏松，

石砾儿轻灵，

小溪儿一跳一跳地向前飞行，

流到了河，

暖融融的流波，

闪亮的银波，

阳光里微酡，

小溪儿笑呷呷地跳入了河，

闹嚷嚷地合唱一曲新婚歌，

“开门，水晶的龙宫，涡堤孩已经成功，她嫁了一个美丽的丈夫，取得了她的灵魂整个。”

小涟儿喜孜孜地窜近了河岸，

手挽着水草，

紧靠着芦苇，

凑近他们的耳朵，

把新闻讲一回，

这是个秘密，

但是秘密也无害，

小涧儿流入河，

河水儿流到海，

我们的消息，

几个转身就传遍。

青湛湛的河水，

曲泠泠的流转，

绕一个梅花岛，

画几个美人涡，

流出了山峡口，

流入了大海波，

笑呼呼地轻唱一回新婚歌，

“开门，水晶的龙宫，涡堤孩已经成功，她嫁了一个美丽的丈夫，取得了她的灵魂整个。”

本诗发表于1925年《晨刊副镌》第60号





快来吧，涡堤孩！


徐志摩

涡堤孩，快来吧，涡堤孩！

清水是一片闪亮的明辉，

满天的星星，

黑夜的清虚，

水灵儿到青草地来小舞纡徊。

没有一棵草上不带露珠，

替你编一身鲜艳的绣帽，

小灵儿欢欣，

月丝儿织成，

明霞似的天锦，

彩虹般的流苏。

涡堤孩，快来吧，涡堤孩！

你披一件闪亮的线衫在青草地上舞蹈，

手挽手儿欢噪，

直到东方放晓，

白云里流出金丹。





第一章　骑士来渔翁家的情形


数百年以前一个美丽的黄昏，有一个仁善的老人，他是个渔翁，坐在他的门口缝补他的网。他住在一极妩媚的地点。他的村舍是筑在绿草上，那草一直伸展到一大湖里；这块舌形的地，好像看了那清明澄碧的湖水可爱不过，所以情不自禁地伸了出去，那湖似乎也很喜欢那草地，她伸着可爱的手臂，轻轻抱住那临风招展的高梗草和恬静怡快的树荫。彼此都像互相做客一般，穿戴得美丽齐整。在这块可爱的地点，除了那渔翁和他的家族以外，差不多永远不见人面。因为在这块舌形地的背后，是一座很荒野的树林，又暗又没有途径，又有种种的妖魔鬼怪，所以除非逼不得已时，没有人敢进去冒险。但是那年高敬神的渔翁，时常漫不经心地穿来穿去，因为在树林背后不远处有一座大城，是他卖鱼的地方。况且他老人家志心朝礼，胸中没有杂念，就是经过最可怕的去处，他也觉得坦坦荡荡，有时他也看见黑影子，但是他赶快拉起他清脆的嗓子，正心诚意地唱圣诗。

所以他那天晚上坐在门口很自在地补网，平空吃了一吓，因为他忽然听见黑暗的树林里有窸窣之声，似乎是有人骑马，而且觉得那声浪愈来愈近这块舌地。因此所有他从前在大风雨晚上所梦见的树林里的神秘，如今他都重新想起来，最可怕的是一个其大无比、雪白的人的影像，不住地点着他很奇怪的头。呀！他抬起头来，向树林里一望，他似乎看见那点头的巨人从深密的林叶里走上前来。但是他立刻振作精神，提醒自己说，一则他从来也没有碰到过什么鬼怪，二则就是树林里有鬼怪，也不见得会到他舌地上来作祟。同时他又使用他的老办法，提起嗓音，正心诚意，背了一段圣经，这一下他的勇气就回复，非但不怕而且觉察他方才的恐慌原来上了一个大当。

在这块舌形地的背后，是一座很阴森可怕的森林，所以没有人敢进去冒险。



那点头的白巨人，忽然变成他原来很熟悉的一条涧水，从树林里一直倾泻到湖里。但是窸窣声的原因却是一个华美的骑士，穿得很漂亮，如今从树荫里骑着马向他的村舍这边来了，一件大红的披肩罩在他紫罗兰色紧身衣外面，周围都是金线绣花；他的金色头盔上装着血红和紫罗兰色的羽毛；在他黄金的腰带上，挂着一把光彩夺目镶嵌富丽的宝剑。他胯下的白马比平常的战马小些，在轻软的青茵上跑来，那马蹄似乎一点不留痕迹。但是老渔翁还是有些不放心，虽然他想那样天神似的风采，决计不会有可疑的地方，所以他站在他的网边很拘谨地招呼那来客。于是骑士勒住马缰，问渔翁能否容他和他的马过宿。

渔翁回答说：“这荫盖的草地不是很好的马房，鲜嫩的青草不是很好的喂料吗？但是我非常愿意招待贵客。预备晚餐和歇处，不过怠慢就是了。”

骑士听了非常满意。他从马上下来，渔翁帮着他解开肚带，取下鞍座，然后让马自由溜去。骑士向主人说：“即使老翁没有如此殷勤招待，我今天晚上总是要扰你的，因为你看前面是大湖，天又晚了，我如何能够再穿过你们生疏的树林回去呢？”

渔翁说：“我们不必客气了。”他于是领了客人进屋子去。

这屋子里面有一壁炉，炉里烧着一些小火，照出一间清洁的房间，渔翁的妻子坐在一把大椅子里。客人进来的时候她站起来很和悦地表示欢迎，但是她仍旧坐了下去，没有将她的上座让客。渔翁见了，就笑着说：“年轻的贵客请勿介意，她没有将屋子里最舒服的椅子让客；这是我们穷民的习惯——只有年高的人可以享用最好的座位。”

他妻子接着笑道：“唉，丈夫，你说笑话了。我们的客是高明的圣徒，哪里会想我们老人家的座位。”她一面对骑士说：“请坐吧，青年的先生，那边有很好的一把小椅子。不过你不要摇摆得太厉害，因为有一只椅脚已经不甚牢靠。”

骑士就很谨慎地取过那椅子，很高兴地坐了下去。他觉得他好像变成了他们小家庭的一分子，简直好像出了一会儿远门刚回家似的。

他们三人于是就开始谈笑，彼此一点也不觉生疏。骑士时常提到那森林，但是老人总说他也不是很熟悉。他以为在晚上那可怕的森林总不是一个相宜的谈料。但是一讲到他们如何管家和一应琐碎的事情，那一对的老夫妻就精神抖擞地应答。他们也很高兴听骑士讲他旅行的经验，又说他在但牛勃河发源的地方有一座城堡，他的名字是林斯推顿的黑尔勃郎公爵。

他们一面谈天，骑士时常觉察小窗下面有些声响，好像有人在那里泼水。老翁每次听得那声音就把眉毛皱紧。但是后来竟是许多水泼上窗板，因为窗格很松，连房子里都是水，老翁气哄哄地站了起来，使着威吓的声音向窗外喊道——

“涡堤孩，不许瞎闹！屋子里有贵客，你不知道吗？”

外面就静了下去，只听见嗤嗤的笑声，老翁转身来说道：

“我的尊贵的客人，对不起，请你容恕，她小孩子的顽皮习惯，但是她无非作耍而已。她是我们的养女涡堤孩，她虽然年纪已快十八，总改不了她的顽皮，可是她是心里很仁善的一个女孩。”

老妇人摇着头插嘴说：“呀！你倒说得好听，若然你捕鱼或者出门归家的时候，她偶然跳跳舞舞，自然是不讨厌。但是她整天到晚地胡耍，也不说一句像样的话，她年纪又不小，照例应得管管家事，帮帮忙，如今你整天去管住她，防她闯祸都来不及，你倒还容宠她咧！——唉！就是圣人都要生气的。”

“好，好！”老翁笑着说，“你的事情是一个涡堤孩，我的是这一道湖。虽然那湖水有时冲破我的网，我还是爱她，你也照样地耐心忍气爱我们的小宝贝。你看对不对？”

他妻子也笑了，点点头说，“的确有点舍不得十分责备她哩。”

门嘭的一声开了，一个绝色的女郎溜了进来，笑着说道：

“父亲，你只在那里说笑话哩，你的客人在哪里？”但是她一头说一头早已看见了那丰神奕奕的少年，她不觉站定了呆着，黑尔勃郎趁此时机，也将他面前安琪似的美人的影像，一口气吸了进去，领起精神赏鉴这天生的尤物，因为他恐怕过一会儿她也许害臊躲了开去，他再不能一饱眼福了。但是不然，她对准他看上好一会儿，她就款款地走近他，跪在他面前，一双嫩玉的手抚弄着他胸前挂着的金链上面一个金坠，说道：

“你美丽，温柔的客人呀！你怎样会到我们这穷家里来呢？你在找到我们之先，必定在世界漫游过几年！美丽的朋友呀，你是不是从那荒野的森林里来的？”

窗外的涡堤孩



老妇人就呵她，没有让他回答，要她站起来，像一个知礼数的女孩，叫她顾手里的工作。但是涡堤孩没有理会，她倒搬过一张搁脚凳来放在黑尔勃郎的身边，手里拿着缝纫的活计，就坐了下去，一面使着很和美的声音说道：

“我愿意去此地做工。”

老翁明明容宠她，只装没有觉察她的顽皮，把话岔了开去。但是女孩子可不答应。她说：

“我方才问客人是从哪里来的，他还没有回答我哩。”

黑尔勃郎说：“我是从森林里来的，我可爱的小影。”她说：“既然如此，你必须告诉我你为什么跑进这森林，因为许多人都怕进去。你必须讲出来，你在里面碰到多少异事，因为凡是进去的人总是会碰到的。”

黑尔勃郎经她一提醒，觉得发了一个寒噤，因为他们想着他在林中所碰见的可怕形象似乎对着他狞笑。但是他除了黑夜之外没有看见什么，现在窗外一点儿光都没有了。于是他将身子耸动一下，预备讲他冒险的情形，可是老翁的话岔住了他。

“骑士先生，不要如此！现在不是讲那种故事的辰光。”

但是涡堤孩，气哄哄地跳将起来，两只美丽的手臂叉在腰间，站在渔翁的面前大声叫道：

“他不讲他的故事，父亲，是不是？他不讲吗？但是我一定要他讲！而且他一定讲！”

她一面说，一面用她可爱的小脚顿着地，但是她虽然生气，她的身段表情，又灵动，又温柔，害得黑尔勃郎的一双眼，像中了催眠一般再也离不开她，方才温和的时候固然可爱，如今发了怒，亦是可爱。但是老头儿再也忍耐不住，大声地呵她，责她不听话，在客人前没有礼貌；那仁善的老妇也加了进来。

涡堤孩说道：“如今你们要骂我，我要怎样你们又不肯依我，好，我就离开你们去了。”

她就像支箭一般射出了门，投入黑暗里不见了。





第二章　涡堤孩到渔人家里的情形


黑尔勃郎和渔人都从座位里跳了起来预备追这生气的女孩。但是他们还没有奔到村舍门口，涡堤孩早已隐伏在外边雾结的黑暗深处，也听不出那小脚的声音是向哪里去。黑尔勃郎一肚子疑惑看着渔人等他解释。他差不多相信这秀美的影像，如今忽然入荒野，一定是和日间在林中作弄他的异迹同一性质；一面老人在他胡子里含糊抱怨，意思是她这样的怪僻行径并不是初次。但是她一跑不要紧，家里人如何能放心安歇，在这荒深的所在，又是深夜，谁料得到她不会遭逢灾难呢？

“然则，我的老翁，让我们去寻她吧。”黑尔勃郎说着，心里很难过。

老人答道：“不过上哪里去寻呢？我要让你在昏夜里独自去追那疯子，我如何过得去，我的老骨头哪里又赶得上她，就是我们知道她在哪儿都没有法子。”

黑尔勃郎说：“但是无论如何我们总得叫着她，求她回来。”他立刻就提高声音喊着：“涡堤孩，涡堤孩呀！快回来吧！”

老人摇摇头，他对骑士说叫是不中用的，并且他不知道那娃娃已经跑得多远。虽然这样说，他也忍不住向黑暗里大声喊着：“涡堤孩呀！亲爱的涡堤孩！我求你回来吧！”

但是果然不中用，涡堤孩是不知去向，没有影踪也没有声音。老人又决计不让黑尔勃郎去盲追，所以他们上门回进屋子。此时炉火差不多已经烧完结，那老太太好像并没有十二分注意那女孩的逃走，早已进房睡去了。老人把余烬拨在一起，放上一些干柴，火焰又慢慢回复过来。他取出一瓶村醪，放在他自己和客人中间。

他说道：“骑士先生，你依旧很替那淘气的孩子着急，我们也睡不着。反不如喝着酒随便谈谈，你看如何？”

黑尔勃郎不表示反对，现在老太太已经归寝，老人就请他坐那张空椅。他们喝喝谈谈露出他们勇敢诚实的本色。但是窗外偶然有一些声响，或者竟是绝无声响，二人不期而会地惊起说：“她来了！”

然后他们静上一两分钟，但是她始终不来，他们摇摇头叹口气，重新继续谈天。

但是实际上两个人的思想总离不了涡堤孩，于是渔翁就开头讲当初她怎样来法，黑尔勃郎当然很愿意听。以下就是他讲那段故事：

“距今十五年前，我有一次带着货经过森林，预备上大城去做买卖，我的妻子照例留在家里。那天幸而她没有离家，因为上帝可怜我们年纪大了，赏给我们一个异样美丽的小孩。这是一小女孩，其时我们就商量我们要不要为这小宝贝利益起见，离开这块舌地另外搬到一处与她更相宜的地方。但是骑士先生，你知道我们穷人的行动，不是容易的事体，上帝知道我们到哪里是哪里。这桩心事一经在我胸中盘旋，有时我经过喧阗的城市，我想起我自己这块亲爱的舌地，我总向自己说：‘我下次的家总得在这样热闹所在。’但是我总不抱怨上帝，我总是感激他，因为他赐我们这小孩。况且我在森林里来来往往，总是天平地静，从来也没有经历过异常的情形。上帝总是跟着我呢。”

讲到此地，他举起他的小帽子，露出他光光的头，恭恭敬敬地默视一会子，然后他重新将帽子戴上，接着讲：

倒是在森林这一边，唉，这一边，祸星来寻到了我。我妻子走到我跟前来两眼好像两条瀑布似的流泪，她已经穿上了丧服。

我哭着说：‘亲爱的上帝呀！我们钟爱的孩子哪里去了？告诉我！’

我妻说：‘亲爱的丈夫，我们的血肉已经到上帝那里去了。’于是一路悄悄地哭着，我们一起走进了屋子。我寻那小孩的身体，方才知道是怎么一回事。我的妻子同她一起在湖边坐着，引她玩笑，没有十分当心，忽然这小东西倾向前去，似乎她在水里见了什么可爱的物件。我的妻子看见她笑，这甜蜜的小安琪儿，拉住她的小手。但是过了一会儿，不知道怎样一转身，她从我妻的臂圈里溜了出来，扑通一声沉了下去。我费尽心机寻那小尸体，但是总没有找到，一点影踪都没有。

那天晚上我们这一对孤单的老夫妇安静地坐在屋子里，我们无心说话，我们尽流泪。我们呆对着炉里的火焰。忽然门上剥啄一声响，门自己开了，一个三四岁最甜美不过的小女孩，穿扮得齐齐整整，站在门口，对着我们笑。我们当时吓得话都说不出来，我起初没有拿准那究竟是真的小生命呢，还是我们泪眼昏花里的幻象呢。我定一定神，看出那小孩黄金的发上和华美的衣服上都在那里滴水，我想那小孩一定是失足落水。现在要我们帮助哩。

一个非常漂亮甜美的小女孩，穿着华美的服装，站在门口，对着我们笑。



‘妻呀，’我说，‘我们自己的孩子是没有人会救的了，但是我们至少应该帮助人家，只要人家也能一样地帮助我们，我们就是地上享福的人了。’

我们就抱了那小孩进来，放她在床上，给她热水喝。这一阵子她没有说一句话，她只张着她海水一样蓝的一对眼睛，不住地向我们望。到了第二天早上，她并没有受寒，我于是问她父母是谁，她怎样会到这里来。但是她讲了一个奇怪荒唐的故事。她一定是从远地方来的，因为，自从她来到现在已经十五年多，我们始终没有寻出她本来的一点痕迹。并且她有时讲话离奇得厉害，你差不多要猜她是月宫里跌下来的。她形容黄金的宫殿，水晶的屋顶，以及一切古怪的东西。但是她所讲最明了那一段是她母亲领了她在湖上经过，她不小心失足落水，以后她就不记得了，一直等到她醒转来，她已经在岸上树底下，她觉得很快活。

“但是现在我们心里发生了大大的疑虑和焦急。我们自己的孩子不见了，找到了她，我们就养育她同自己的一样，那是很容易决定的。不过谁知道这小东西有没有经过洗礼呢？她自己又不知道。固然她明晓她生命的产生是仰仗着上帝的灵光和幸福，她也常常告诉我们，我们若然要用上帝光荣的名义来怎样她，她也很愿意。这是我们夫妇私下的讨论。假使她从没有受过洗礼，我们岂不是就应该赶快举行，就是她从前经过洗礼，横竖是好事，少做不如多做。我们就商量替她取个名字，因为一直到现在我们实在不知怎样叫她。结果我们决定叫她多萝西娅，因为人家告诉我那个字的意义是‘上帝的赠品’，实际上的确是上帝送她来安慰我们暮年光景的。但是她不愿意要那个名字，她说涡堤孩是她父母给她的名字，她再也不乐意人家用别的名字叫她。我可是疑心那名字是异教的，我们圣书上从没有见过这样的名字，所以我上城里去与一牧师商量。他亦说涡堤孩的名字，靠不住，后来经我再三求他才替她题名，他才答应特别穿过森林到我们村舍来专办那桩事。但是她那天穿着得那样美丽，她的表情又蜜糖似的，弄得那牧师心不由自主，她又想法去恭维他，回时又挑激他，结果他将所有反对涡堤孩那名字的种种理由，全忘记干净。所以结果她洗礼的名字，依旧是涡堤孩。她虽然平时又野又轻躁，行礼那天，说也奇怪，她自始至终异常规矩温和。我妻子说的不错，我们还有可怕的事体对付。只要我告诉你——”

涡堤孩的幼年生活



但是他讲到此，骑士打断了他话头，叫他注意外边声响，好像哪里发水似的，那声响他觉得已经好久，现在愈听愈近，差不多到了窗外。二人跳到门口。他们借着刚升起来的月光，看见从树林里流出来那条小涧，两岸涨水都平泻开来，水又来得急，一路卷着石块木条，呼呼向旋涡里滚去。同时大风雨又发作，好像被那水吼惊醒了似的，转瞬一大片黑云将月光一齐吞没；这湖也在暴风翅儿底下汹涌起来；舌地上的树从根到枝叶尖儿一齐呜呜悲鸣，并且不住地摇着，好像那回旋的风吹得他们头都昏了。

两个人一齐着了慌，都拼命地喊着：“涡堤孩！涡堤孩！上帝保佑，涡堤孩！”但是一无回响，两人这时也顾不得三七二十一就离开村舍各取一个方向，朝前直冲。

“涡堤孩！涡堤孩！回来！涡堤孩！”





第三章　他们找到涡堤孩的情形


他们在黑夜的影子里乱冲乱喊，再也找不到，黑尔勃郎尤其着急。他方才所想涡堤孩终究不知是人非人的问题，重新回到他心里；一面浪呀风呀水呀愈闹愈凶，树枝的声响更来得可怕，这整块长形的地，不久还是平静可爱，这村舍和居住的人，一起都好像荒唐的幻影。但是，远远的，他依旧听得见那渔人慌张的声浪，叫着涡堤孩，还有屋子里老妇人高声的祷告和唱圣诗，和万窍的号声参差相间。后来他走近那泛滥的涧流，在微芒中看见这猖獗的一条水，一直横扫森林的边儿下来，差不多将这条长形的地切成一个岛。

“亲爱的上帝，”他自己想着，“要是涡堤孩竟是穿过此地，闯入这不可思议的森林——或者就为我没有告诉她我在里面的经验激怒了她可爱的犟脾气——如今这莽流将我们截成两段，她也许在那边进退两难，在种种鬼影中间饮泣哩！”一阵恐怖盖住了他。他跨过许多石块和打下的枯枝，打算走到那涧边，然后或泳或想法渡过那边去找她。同时他又记起白天在森林里所见的骇人奇异的影像。他似乎觉得那最可怕硕大无比的白人在水的那边向他点头狞笑；但是种种幻像幻想无非使他益发奋勇向前，因为那方面愈诡秘，涡堤孩不测的机会亦愈大，他如何能让这可怜的小孩独自在死的影子里放着呢？

他已经找到一块很结实的枯梗，将身跨进水里撑着那条新式行杖，狼狈不堪地想和紧旋的急流奋斗。正在这个尴尬辰光，他忽然听见一个甜美的声音在他旁边喊道：“小心小心，这条河是很险的！”

他认识这可爱的声音，他踌躇了一会儿，因为他在重荫下差不多没有一些光亮，同时水已经没上他膝盖。但是他不转身。“假使你果真不在那边，假使只要你的幽灵是在我旁边舞着，我也不情愿再活，只要和你一样变一个鬼——喂，我爱，我亲爱的涡堤孩！”

这几句话他使劲喊着，一面尽望急流里冲。

“看仔细，啊唷！小心，你漂亮，情昏的少年呀。”一个声音在他旁边叫，他于是往旁边一看，刚巧月光又出来了照得很亮，他见在几棵高而交叉的树枝下，一座为水泥造成的小岛上，可不是坐着那涡堤孩，她笑嘻嘻地蹲踞在花草里。

她这一出现，黑尔勃郎立刻精神百倍，使劲地撑着枯枝，向她进发。不上几步他居然出了头，渡过这条猖狂的小“银河”，到了他“织女”的跟前，足下是密软青葱的细草，头顶是虬舞龙盘的树幕。涡堤孩将身子略为站起，伸出她臂膀来，搂住他的项颈，将他拉下来一起蹲着。

“我可爱的朋友，现在在此地你可以讲你的故事了。”她轻轻地吹在他耳边，“此地我们可以自由谈话，那些讨厌的老人家再也不会听见。你看我们这叶织的篷帐不是比那可怜的村舍好些吗？”

在明亮的月光照耀下，他看见在几支高而交叉的树枝下，一座为水泥造成的小岛上，坐着那涡堤孩，她笑嘻嘻地蹲在花草里。



黑尔勃郎说：“这是真正天堂！”一面将她紧紧搂在怀里，接着蜜甜的吻。

但是刚巧这个时光那老渔人也已经赶到涧边，隔着水向这对密切的青年喊道：

“喂，先生！我没有待亏你，你倒在那里与我养女寻开心，让我一个人着忙在黑暗里乱撞。”

“仁善的老人，我刚刚才寻到她哩。”骑士也喊过去。

渔人说：“那还说得过去。但是现在请你再不要延宕，赶快将她带过到平地上来。”

但是涡堤孩不愿意听那话，她想就在这荒天野地和这美丽的客人谈天，比回到老家有趣得多，况且一到家里又不许她自由，客人迟早也要离开。她索性将两臂箍住了黑尔勃郎，口里唱着异样好听的歌：

泉水出山兮，

幽歌复款舞，

逶延青林兮，

言求桃花渚；

款舞复幽歌，

忽遘万顷湖，

欣欣合流兮，

止舞不复歌。

老渔人听了她的歌，由不得伤心起来，涕泪淋漓，但是她依旧漠然不动。一面她抱紧她情人吻之不已。后来黑尔勃郎倒不自在起来，向她说：

涡堤孩不愿意听那话，她想就在这荒天野地和这美丽的客人谈天，她索性将两臂箍住了黑尔勃郎，口里唱着异样好听的歌。



“涡堤孩，那老人悲伤得可怜，你不动心，我倒不忍心，让我们回去吧。”

她张开她碧蓝的妙眼很惊异地看着他，过了一歇，才慢吞吞含糊说道：

“果然你想我们一定要回去——也好！你说对就是我的对。不过那边老儿，一定要答应回去以后他再也不许拦住你告诉我森林里的故事，其余我倒不管。”

老人喊道：“好了，来吧！再不要说废话，来吧！”同时他伸出他的手臂，隔着水预备接她。一面点着头，似乎说“依你依你”。他的几卷白发乱糟糟一齐挂在他脸上，这副情形，又提起了黑尔勃郎森林里那颠头大白人。但是此时不管他，黑尔勃郎轻轻将涡堤孩抱在手里，涉过水来。老儿一见涡堤孩便搂住她的颈项接吻，很怜惜她。夹忙里老太太也赶了过来，也搂抱住她。老夫妻再也不呵她，尤其因为涡堤孩也是甜言蜜语哄得老人心花怒放，一场淘气就此了结。

但是宝贝找回来了，湖面上已经渐渐发亮；风雨也止了，小鸟在湿透的树枝上噪个不停。涡堤孩到了家，也不要旁的，只要黑尔勃郎讲他的冒险，老夫妻再也无法，也只好笑着由她。老太太把早餐端出来，放在村背湖边的树下，大家一齐高高兴兴坐了下来——涡堤孩坐在黑尔勃郎足边的草上，因为她只肯坐在这里。

于是黑尔勃郎开始讲他的故事。





第四章　骑士在林中经过的情形


“八天以前，我骑马到那森林背后的自由城市。我一到刚巧那边举行大赛武会，一大群人围着。我就闯入围去，报名与赛。一天我正站在比武场中休息，除下头盔来交给我从人，我忽然觉察一个绝美的妇人，站在厢楼上一瞬不转地对我望着。我就问旁人她是谁。他们说那美貌女郎的名字叫培儿托达，是本地一贵族的养女。她已经注意我，我自然也回答她的青睐，下面较赛的时候，我也特别卖力，无往不利。那天晚上跳舞会恰巧我又是她的舞伴，从此到赛会完结我们常在一起。”

讲到此，他本来垂着的左手上忽觉得奇痛，打断了他的话头。他转身去看那痛的所在。原来是涡堤孩一口珠牙使劲啮住他的手指，她的神气又怒又恨。但是一下子她又转过她钟爱的秋波，倾入他眼内，口里柔声说道——

“这是你自己不好！”

说过她将头别转了去。黑尔勃郎经她出其不意一咬一嗔，又惊又窘，却也无可奈何，仍旧继续讲他的故事——

这培儿托达是又骄傲又乖僻的一个女郎。第二日她就没有第一日可爱，第三日更差了。但是我还是与她周旋，因为她在许多骑士内算和我最亲近些。有一天我和她开玩笑，求她给我一只手套。

她倒庄严说道：‘要我手套不难，只要你单身敢进那森林去随后来报告我那里面究竟如何情形。’

“我其实并不稀罕她的手套，但是我们骑士的习惯，说一句是一句，既然惹了出来，唯有向前去。”

“我想她爱你。”涡堤孩插进来说。

黑尔勃郎说：“是有点儿意思。”

“哼！”她冷笑着叫道，“她不是呆子，来遣开她爱的人。况且遣他到危险的森林里！要是我，情愿不知道森林里的秘密，也决不会让他去冒险。”

黑尔勃郎很和气地对她笑笑，接着讲：

我是昨天早上动身的。我一进森林，只见那树梗经朝阳照着鲜红绝嫩，地下绿草同绒毯一般光软，树叶微微颤动，好像彼此在那里私语，一路绝好的景致，我心里不觉暗笑那城里人诬空造谣，说这样蜜甜的所在有什么奇情异迹。我想用不了多少时候，就可以对穿树林回来。但是我正在欣欣得意时，我的马已走入绿荫深处，回过头来已经看不见背后的城市。心里想走迷路倒说不定的，大概他们所以怕者就是为此。我所以停了下来，四面看转来想找出太阳的方向，太阳那时已升得很高。刚在那个当儿我觉得前面一棵高大橡树上有一个东西。我猜是熊，我就摸刀，但见那件东西忽然发出粗而可厌的人声说道——

‘喂，厚颜先生，假使我不把这些树枝咬了，今晚半夜你到哪里受烧烤去呢？’

“那东西一面狞笑，一面将树枝搅得怪响，我胯下的马一吓立刻放开蹄子狂奔，所以我始终没有看清楚那魔鬼究竟是什么。”

老渔人道：“不要这样说。”他将两臂叉成十字形；老妇人也照样一做，一声不发。涡堤孩张着明星似的眼向他望，说道：“这一段最好的地方，是他们究竟没有烧烤他。再讲，可爱的少年！”

骑士接着说——

“我的被惊吓的马背着我往树枝丛里瞎闯，他浑身是汗，也不听勒束。后来他差不多对准一石罅里冲去。其时我猛然看出我马前出现了一个顶高的白人，我的马也见了，吓得停了下来。我乘机扣住了它，我又定神一看，原来方才以为大白人者是一条瀑布的一片银光，从一山脚上一直泻下来，拦断了我马的路。”

“多谢多谢，瀑布！”涡堤孩喊道，她两只手拍在一起。但是那老人却摇摇头，呆顿顿地注视他面前。

黑尔勃郎又讲——

我刚正整理好鞍缰，我旁边突然发现一个小人，矮而丑得不可以言语形容，浑身棕黄，一个鼻子大得与他其余全体放在一起不相上下。他那横阔的口缝一咧，露出怪样的蠢笑，向我鞠上无数的躬。我不愿意和这丑东西胡闹，我就简括地谢了他，旋转我那余惊未已的马，想换一头走走，要是再碰不见什么，想就回去，那时候太阳早过了子午线，渐渐地西沉。但是忽然像电光似的一闪，那小东西又站在我马前。

我恨恨地说道：‘闪开去！我的牲口很野，小心它撞倒你。’

‘喀！’那矮子也发出怒声，这会儿笑得尤其蠢相。

他说：‘给我些钱，因为我拦住你的马。要是没有我，你同你的马不是早滚入那石罅里去了。哼！’

‘不要装出那许多鬼脸，拿钱去吧，你这谎徒，方才救我的是那瀑布，哪里是你可厌的小鬼！’说着我摸出一块金币，投在他双手张着像叫花似的那怪样的小帽。我就向前，但是他在背后怪叫，忽然他又并着我的马跑得异样地快。我放开缰绳飞跑；但是他也跟着飞跑，跑得那矮鬼浑身都像脱节似的，看了又可笑又可厌。他手里举起我的金币，一路跳一路叫：‘坏钱！坏币！坏币！坏钱！’他放开重浊的嗓子，狠命地喊，每次好像喊断了气。他可怕的红舌头也伸了出来。我倒慌了，只好停了下来，我问他为什么吵得这样凶。‘再拿一块去，’我说，‘拿两块去吧，给我滚开。’

他又重新还他奇丑的敬礼，口里狺狺说道：

‘但是我的小先生，不是金子，这不会是金子，这类的废物我自己就有不少，等一等，我给你看。’

其时忽然地皮变成玻璃似透明，地皮也变成球形，我望进去只见一大群矿工玩着金子银子。他们翻筋斗，豁虎跳，滚在一起，互以金银相击，彼此以金屑吹到面上。我那丑的伴侣，一半在里面，一半在外面；他叫他们把一堆堆金子推给他，他拿出来给我看，哈哈笑着，然后又抛进地里去。他又将我给他的金币递给下面那些人看，他们笑得半死，大家都伸长了脖子发尖声嘲笑我。后来他们爽性伸出涂满矿屑的指头点着我，愈吵愈凶，愈喊愈响，愈跳愈疯，他们一大群都爬出来向我直奔。那时我可真吓了。我的马也大起恐慌。我两腿拼命一夹，它就电掣似的飞跑，这是第二次我在林中瞎闯。

“等到我顿了下来，我觉得一股晚凉。我从树林里望见一条白色的足径，我心里一慰，想那一定是通城里的路。我就往那道上走，但是一个暗洞洞的面貌，完全白色，形状尽在那里变，从树叶里向我看。我想避了他，但是随你怎样避，他总挡着我。后来我益发很想冲他过去，但是他抛下一个大白水泡打在我同马身上，一阵昏转，连方向都认不清楚。那东西一步步赶着我们，只让我们看清楚一个方向。等到我们走上那条路，他紧跟在背后，但是似乎没有恶意的样子。过了一会儿我们四面一看，我看出那白水泡的脸是长在一个一样白的奇大无比的一个身体上。我疑心那一定是游行的水柱，但是终究不知道是什么一回事。那时马和人都倦得很，只好听那白人的指挥，他跟着一路点头，似乎说：‘很对！很对！’所以直到晚来我们到了林边，我望见菜园和湖里的水，你的小村舍，那时候白人也就不知去向。”

那矮鬼手里举着骑士给的金币，一路跳一路叫：“坏钱！坏币！坏币！坏钱！”



最后他们都伸出污迹斑斑的指头指着我。



“好容易出来了！”渔人说。他于是商量他转去的时候最好走哪一条路。但是涡堤孩一个人在那里傻笑。黑尔勃郎觉得了说道：

“我以为你昨天很欢喜见我？为什么我们讲起我要离去，你这样开心？”

涡堤孩说：“因为你不会成功，随你想法去渡那泛滥的涧。其实你还是不试为佳，因为那急水里下来的树枝石片，很容易将你冲得粉碎。至于这条湖，我知道父亲也不能很远地撑你出去。”

黑尔勃郎站起来，笑着，看看究竟她讲的是否事实。老人伴着他，涡堤孩在他们旁边跳。他们一看情形，她的话是对的，骑士心里打算既然如此，只好暂时在这岛上等着，水退了再走。他们走了一转，三人一齐回到屋子里，黑尔勃郎在女孩耳边轻轻说道——

“如此便怎么样呢，小涡堤孩呀？我现在要住下来你讨厌不讨厌？”

“哼，”她悻悻地答道，“算了，不要假惺惺！要不是我咬你那一口，谁知道你那故事里还有多少培儿托达哩！”





第五章　骑士住在湖边的情形


我亲爱的读者，你们在世界上浪漫的东西，也许是有一天寻到个安心适意的地方，你情愿弹扑了你鞋帽上的风尘，打算过几时安静生活。我们本性里恋慕在家园过太平日子的愿望，到那时自然醒了过来；你想起未来的家庭，充满幸福和纯挚的爱情，机会难再，此地既然合适何妨就此住下来，开手建造呢？事实上结果也许与你那时的理想大相悬殊，也许你日后会懊丧当时的错误，但是这方面我们暂且不管。我们只要各人想起生平预期平安乐境的情形，就可以体会黑尔勃郎当日在湖边住下来的心理。

事有凑巧，那涧水愈泛愈宽，简直将这块长地截成岛形，黑尔勃郎心中私喜，因为他借此可以延长他做客的时候。他在村舍里寻出一张弓，他就收拾一下，每天出去射鸟作耍，有时打到了佳味，自是他们的口福。涡堤孩很不愿意他这样丧残生命，每次他带回伤禽，她总责他不应如此残酷。但是他要是没有打到东西，她一样的不愿意，因为没有野味，他们只好鱼虾当膳。她奇怪的脾气反而使得黑尔勃郎享受精美的快感，尤其因为她一阵子娇嗔满面，转眼又放出万种风流，任他细细地消化温柔幸福。那对老夫妻见他们如此亲热，自然有数；也就看待他们好比已经订婚似的，或者竟当他们是已婚的夫妇，因为照顾他们高年，所以移到这岛上来同住。如此清静的生活，简直使黑尔勃郎觉得他已经是涡堤孩的新郎。他幻想这两老一少茅舍小岛以外，再也没有世界，他就想再与世人接触也是枉然。有时他那战马对着主人长鸣，似乎提醒催促他再干英雄事业，有时那锦鞍上宝章猛然向着他闪发光芒，有时他挂在屋里的宝剑从壁上跌了下来，在剑鞘里吐出悲凉的啸声，他的雄心亦未尝不动，但是他总自慰道：“涡堤孩非渔家女，其必为远方贵族之秀嗣无疑。”

如今他听那老妇人谯呵涡堤孩，他觉得老大的不舒服。虽然这顽皮的孩子总不让人家占便宜，但他总以为他的妻子被责；可是他又不能抱怨老太太，因为涡堤孩其实恶作剧得厉害。所以结果他还是敬爱这主妇，一面自寻欢乐。

但是不多几时，他们平安的生活发生了一个小问题。平常吃饭的时候，要是户外有风（其实每天多有风），渔翁和骑士总是一杯在手，相对陶然。这酒是渔人从前从城里带回来的，现在交通一隔绝，他们的存货已经完结，两个人都觉得不自在起来。涡堤孩还是照样开心，笑得震天价响，他们可无心加入。一到晚上她就离开屋子。她说她不愿看他们两个拉得顶长生气的脸子。刚巧那天天气又变，黄昏的辰光树里风湖里浪叫得怪响，他们心里一吓，一齐跳到门口拦住涡堤孩不许出去，因为他们记起上一次的花样。但是涡堤孩开心地拍着一双手，对他们说道：

“要是我变出酒来，你们给我什么报酬？其实我也不想报酬，只要你们今天拉得长长干燥无味的脸子，有了酒来一润，马上回复原来欢喜的样子，我就满意。你们跟我来吧。这森林的涧水送给我们一大桶好酒在岸边，要是我骗人，你们尽管罚我睡一个礼拜不许起来。”

他们似信非信跟了她去，走到涧边，果然见草堆里一个桶，而且看上去竟像上等酒桶。他们就赶紧将这桶朝屋里滚，因为天色很坏，湖礁边头的白沫溅得很高，好像他们探起头来，招呼快下来的阵雨。涡堤孩也忙着帮他们推，这时候大点的雨已经从密层层的乌云里漏下来，她仰起头来望着天说道——

“小心弄湿我们，还要好一会子我们才到家哩。”

老儿听了，骂她不应该对天无礼，但是她一个人尽是咯咧咧笑着。说也奇怪，雨果然没有下来，一直等他们到了家，把桶盖子揭开，试出桶内的确是一种奇味上好的香酿，那雨才倾盆而下，树枝湖水也夹着大发声威。

他们一会儿盛上好几瓶，这一下又可以几天无忧。酒一到立刻满屋生春，老的小的，男的女的，都兴致很高，外边尽让它雷雨，他们围着炉火一起谈笑。老渔人忽然一本正经郑重地说道——

“嘻！你威灵的天父，我们不知道怎样感谢你的恩赏，但是那可怜的主人恐怕已经葬身在河里了。”

涡堤孩笑眯眯对着骑士举起酒杯，接着说：“算了，再也不用管他们！”

但是黑尔勃郎也庄严地说道：“老父呀，只要我能寻得那人，我一定不辞冒险去黑暗中摸索。但是我告诉你，假使我果然找到了那酒主人或是他们一群人，我情愿照原价加倍还他。”

老人听了很中意，他点着头表示赞成他的见解，良心上的负担一去，他就高高兴兴举起杯来一饮而尽。

但是涡堤孩向黑尔勃郎说：“你要花的钱，尽花不妨事。但是你要跑出去瞎找，那不是傻子？你要是不见了，我一定连我的眼睛都哭出来，你一定得答应不去，和我们一起喝酒好。”

当大暴雨即将从密层层的乌云降落在他们的头上时，她仰起头望着天责备道：“小心弄湿我们，还要好一会我们才到家哩。”



黑尔勃郎笑了，答道——

“唉，是的，当然！”

她说：“既然如此，何必讲那蠢话。各人自己应该当心，何必旁人多管？”

老太太叹了口气，摇摇头别转了去；老头儿也不高兴，责她道：

“你倒好像是异教徒或是土耳其养大来的，但求上帝宽恕我们，你这不学好的孩子。”

“是不错，很对，但是我有我的意见，”涡堤孩接口说，“随他是谁养育我的，你说的话多不相干。”

老儿板下脸来喝道：“少说话！”

她虽然唐突惯的，这次可也吓得发颤，抱住黑尔勃郎低声问道——

“难道你在发怒吗，我美丽的朋友？”

骑士握紧她软绵似的手，拍拍她的头发。他也说不出什么话，因为老人对涡堤孩如此严厉，他很不愿意，所以这一老一小两人呆呆地坐着，彼此都生气，静悄悄过了好一阵子。





第六章　结婚


正在大家觉得尴尬，忽然一阵轻轻的叩门声从静空气里传了过来，屋子里的人一齐骇然。这是我们都有经验的，一桩很无足轻重的事实，因为他突然而来，往往引起绝大的恐慌，但是这一回我们应该记得那奥妙的森林就在他们附近，而且他们这块地是人迹不到的地方，所以他们相顾惶惶。又听见叩了几下，跟着一声深深的叹息。骑士就起来去拿刀，但是老人悄悄说道：“假使来的是我所虑的，有兵器也不中用。”

同时涡堤孩已经走近门边，厉声叫道：“你若来不怀好意，你地鬼，枯尔庞自会教训你好样子。”

其余屋里的人，听见她古怪的话，更吓了；他们都看着她，黑尔勃郎正要开口问她，门外有人说道：“我不是地鬼，我是好好的人。要是你们愿意救我，要是你们怕上帝，你村舍里面的人，赶快让我进来！”

但是他话还没有说完，涡堤孩早已呀的一声把门打开，手里拿着灯往外面黑夜里一照。他们看见一个年老的牧师，他无意见这样神仙似的一个少女，倒吓得缩了回去。他心里想这样荒野地方，一间小茅屋发现了如此美丽的幻象，一定是什么精怪在那里作弄他，所以他就祷告：“一切善灵，颂扬上帝！”

涡堤孩笑起来了，说道：“我不是鬼，难道我长来丑得像鬼？无论如何，你明明看见你的圣咒没有吓我。我也知道上帝，知道赞美他。神父，进来吧，屋子里都是好人。”

牧师战兢兢鞠了一躬，走了进来，他神气很和善可敬。但是他的长袍上，他的白胡子上，他的白发上，处处都在那里滴水。渔人同骑士立即引他到内房，拿衣服给他换，一面将他的湿衣交给老太太去烘干。这老牧师至至诚诚地谢他们，但是不敢穿那骑士取给他的锦绣的披肩。他另外选了渔人一件旧灰色外套穿上。等他回到外房，主妇赶快将她自己的太师椅让他坐，再也不许他客气。“因为，”她说，“你年高又‘累’了，而且是上帝的人。”涡堤孩老规矩将她平常坐在黑尔勃郎身旁的小凳子推到牧师的脚边，并且很殷勤地招呼这老人。黑尔勃郎轻轻向她说了一句笑话，但是她正色答道——

“他是服侍创造我们一切的他。这并不是闹着玩的事。”

于是骑士和渔人拿酒食给他，牧师吃过喝过，开头讲他昨天从大湖的对面的修道院动身，打算到僧正管区去告诉大水为灾，修道院和邻近村落都受损失。但是他走到傍晚辰光，有一处被水冲断了，他只得雇了两个船家渡他过去。

“但是，”他接着说，“我们的小船刚划得不远，大风雨忽然发作，水势既狂，旋涡更凶。一不小心，船家的桨都叫浪头打劫了去，转瞬不知去向。我们只得听天由命，几阵浪头将我们漂到湖的这边。后来我神魂飘荡，只觉得去死不远，但是我知觉回复的时候，我身子已被浪头送到你们岛上的树下。”

“你说我们岛上！”渔人说道，“本来连着对面的。但是这几天森林里的急流同湖水发了疯，我们连自己都不知道在哪里了。”

牧师说：“我在水边黑暗里爬着，满耳荒野的声音，看见一条走熟的路，领到那边咆哮的水里。后来我见到你们屋子里的光，我就摸了过来，我不知道怎样感谢天父，他从水里救了我出来，又送我到你们这样虔敬的人家；况且我不知道我这辈子除了你们四位以外，会不会再见人类呢？”

“你这话怎样讲？”渔人问道。

牧师说：“谁知道这水几时才能退？我是老衰了。也许水还没有静下去，我的老命倒用到头了。而况水势要是尽涨，你这里离陆地愈远，你的小小渔舟又不能过湖，也许我们从此再不能与世人接触也未可知。”

老主妇听了用手支着十字说道：“上帝不许！”但是渔人望她笑笑，答道——

“那也并没有什么稀奇，尤其于你不相干，老妻是不是？这几年来你除了森林到过哪里？除了涡堤孩和我，你又见过什么人呢？骑士先生来了没有几时，神父刚刚到得。假使我们果真同世间隔绝了，他们两位也和我们同住，那岂不是更好吗？”

老太太说：“难说得很，同世界上隔绝，想想都可怕。”

“但是你要和我们住了，你要和我们住了。”涡堤孩挨到黑尔勃郎身边轻轻地唱着。

但是他正在那里出神。自从牧师讲了最后一番话，那森林背后的世界，好像愈退愈远；这花草遍地的岛上愈觉得青青可爱，似乎对他笑得加倍的鲜甜。他的新娘在这大地一点上好比一朵最娇艳的蔷薇婷婷开着，并且如今牧师都在身边。他一头想，那老太太见涡堤孩在牧师面前和黑尔勃郎黏得如此紧，露出一脸怒气，似乎一顿骂就要发作。骑士再也忍不住，转过来对牧师说道——

“神父呀！你看在你的跟前一个新郎和新妇。如其这孩子和她父母不反对，请你今晚就替我们结婚。”

这对老夫妇吓了一大跳。他们固然早已想到这件事体，但是他们都放在肚里，就是老夫妻间彼此也没有明讲过，现在骑士忽然老老实实说了出来，他们倒觉得非常离奇。涡堤孩顿然正色不语，呆钝钝看着地上，一面牧师在那里打听仔细实际情形，又问老夫妻主意如何。讲了好一阵子，一切都很满意的决定。主妇就起身去替小夫妻铺排新房，又寻出一对神烛来。同时骑士拿下他的金链来，打算拗成两个戒指，预备结婚时交换。但是她一看见忽然好像从她思想的底里泅了上来，说道——

“不必！我的父母并没有打发我到世上来要饭。他们的确想到迟早这么一晚总要临到我的。”

说着，她奔出门去，一会儿回来手里拿着两个宝贵的戒指，一个递给新郎，一个自己戴上。老渔人很惊骇地注视她，老太太更觉稀奇，因为他们从来不知道小孩子有这对戒指。

涡堤孩说：“我的父母将这些小物事缝在我来时穿的衣服里。但是他们不许我告诉随便哪个，除非我结婚。所以我一声不响将它们藏在门外，直到今晚。”

牧师已经将神烛点起，放在桌上，打断他们的问答，吩咐那两口子站在他跟前。然后他替他们结婚，老夫妻祝福小夫妻，新娘倚在新郎身上微微颤动，在那里想心事。突然牧师喊道：“你们这群人好古怪！为什么你们告诉我这岛上除了你们四人，再也没有生灵？但是我行礼的时候我见对着我一个高大穿白袍的人在窗外望。他这时候一定到了门口，或者他要这屋子里什么东西。”

老太太跳将起来叫道：“上帝禁止！”渔人一声不发摇摇头，黑尔勃郎跳到窗口，他似乎看见一道白光，突然遁入黑夜里去了。但是他告诉牧师一定是他偶尔眼花，看错了，于是大家欢欢喜喜围着炉火坐了下来。





第七章　结婚以后当晚的情形


那晚结婚行礼涡堤孩始终很知礼节，但是等得一完结，她的顽皮立刻发作，而且比往常加倍放肆。新郎，她的养父母，和她方才很敬礼的牧师，她一一都开玩笑，直到老妇人真耐不过去，放下脸来想发话。但是骑士很严肃地止住了她，意思说涡堤孩现在是他的妻子，不应随便听申斥。在事实上骑士心里也觉得她闹得太过分，但是他用尽种种方法再也不能收束她。有时新娘觉得新郎不愿意，她稍为静一点，坐在他旁边，笑着吹几句软话到他耳边，结果将他皱紧的眉山重新平解了去。但是一波未平一波又起，她不多一会儿又是无法无天地闹将起来。后来牧师也看不过，正色说道：“我年轻的好友，看了你谁也觉得你活泼有趣，但是你要记住总得调剂你灵魂的音乐，使他抑扬顿挫，与你最爱丈夫的和谐一致才好。”

“灵魂！”涡堤孩喊道，她笑了起来，“你说得很中听，也许是大多数人应该服从的规则。但是一个人若然连灵魂都没有，那便怎么样呢？我倒要请教，我就是这么一回事。”

牧师还以为她和他顽皮，听了大怒，默然不语，很忧愁地将他的眼光别转了去。但是她盈盈地走到他面前，说道——

“不要如此，你要生气，也先听我讲讲明白，因为你不高兴我也不痛快，人家对你好好的，你更不应该让人家难过。你只要耐耐心心，让我讲给你听我究竟什么意思。”

大家正在等她解释，她忽然顿了下来，好像内部一种恐怖将她抓住，她眼泪同两条瀑布似的泻了出来。这一突如其来，大家也不知怎样才好，各人都踌躇不安地向她望着。过了一会儿她收干眼泪，很诚恳地朝着牧师，说道——

“有灵魂一定是一桩很欢喜的事，也是一件最可怕的事。是不是——先生用上帝名字告诉我——是不是爽性没有它倒还好些？”

她又顿了下来，似乎她眼泪又要突围而出，等着回答。屋子里的人现在都站了起来，吓得都往后退。但是她只注意牧师，同时她面貌上出现一种非常离奇的表情——这表情使得大家心里都充满了绝对的恐怖。

大家没有做声，她又接着说：“灵魂一定是一个很重的负担，真是重。我只想到它快临到我，我就觉到悲愁和痛苦。你看，方才我多快活，多没有心事！”

她又大放悲声，将衣服把脸子蒙住。牧师很严肃地向着她，用圣咒吩咐，如其她心里有什么恶魔的变相，叫她用上帝的威灵驱他出去。但是她跪了下来，将他的圣咒背了一遍，并且赞美感谢上帝，因为她心里很平安清洁。然后牧师向骑士说：“新郎先生，你的新妇，我现在听你去管她。照我看来，她一点没有邪恶。虽然有些怪僻，我保举她，望你小心，忠实爱她。”

说着他出去了，老夫妇也跟着出去，用手架着十字。

涡堤孩仍旧跪在地下，她仰起头，羞怯怯瞅着黑尔勃郎，说道：“如今你也不要我了，但是我苦命孩子并没有闹乱子。”

她说得楚楚可怜，万分妩媚，黑尔勃郎原来一肚子恐怖和疑心，顿时飞出九霄之外，赶快过去将她抱了起来，温存了一会儿。她也从眼涕里笑了出来，好比阳光照着晶莹的涧水。

她轻轻用手拍着他脸子，私语道：“你离不了我，你舍不得我。”他毅然决然连肚肠角角里所有的疑惧一齐消灭——因为他曾经想他新娘或者是鬼怪的变相。但是还有一句话，他忍不住问她——

“涡堤孩我爱，告诉我一件事，那牧师敲门的时候，你说什么地鬼，又是什么枯尔庞，究竟什么意思？”

“童话！童话！”涡堤孩说，她笑将起来，重新又乐了。“开头我吓你，收梢你吓我。这算是尾声，也是结束我们新婚夜！”

“不是，这哪里是收梢。”骑士说着，早已神魂飞荡。他吹灭了烛，涡堤孩先要开口，她一朵樱桃早已被他紧紧噙住，害她气都透不过来。恰好月光如泻照着这一对情人喜孜孜地进房归寝。





第八章　结婚次日


清晨的光亮将小夫妻惊醒。涡堤孩羞答答将被蒙住了头，黑尔勃郎已在床上睁着眼思索。他夜间一睡熟就做稀奇可怕的梦，梦见鬼怪变成美妇人来迷他，一会儿她们的脸子全变作龙的面具。他吓醒了睁开眼，只见一窗流水似的月光。他就很恐慌地往涡堤孩一看，（他伏在她胸口睡）只见她沉沉眠熟异样风流。他于是向她玫瑰似的唇上印了一吻，重新入睡，但是不一会儿又被怕梦惊觉。现在天也亮了，他完全醒了，神仙似的新娘依旧无恙，在他旁边卧着，他将过去的经验重头想了一遍，他对于涡堤孩的疑心也彻底解散。他老老实实求她饶恕，她伸出一只玉臂给他，叹了一口长气，默然不答。但是她妙眼里荡漾着万缕深情潸然欲涕，黑尔勃郎如今是死心塌地地相信她的心是完全属他再也没有疑问。

他高高兴兴起来，穿好衣服，走入客堂。他们三个人早已围炉坐着，大家满脸心事谁也不敢发表意见。牧师似乎在那里祷告祈免一切灾难。等到他们一见新郎满面欢容出来，他们方才放心。渔人也就提起兴致和骑士开玩笑，连老太太都笑将起来。涡堤孩也预备好了，出房来站在门口，大家都想贺喜她，但是大家都注意到她脸上带着一种奇特又熟悉的表情。牧师第一个很仁慈地欢迎她，他举手替她祝福。她震震地跪在他面前。她卑声下气请他饶恕昨晚种种的放肆，并且求他祝福她灵魂的健康。然后她起来，与她养父母接吻，谢他们一切恩德——

“我在心里感觉你们待我的慈爱，我不知怎样感激才好，你们真是可亲可爱的人呀！”

她将他们紧紧抱住，但是她一觉察老太太想起了早饭，她立刻跑到灶前去料理端整，只让最轻简的事给她娘做。

她一整天都是如此——安静、和善、留心，俨然一位小主妇，同时又是娇羞不胜的新娘。

知道她老脾气的三人，刻刻提防她现狐狸尾巴，归到本来面目。但是他们的打算全错。涡堤孩始终温柔恬静，同安琪儿一样。牧师的眼再也离不了她，他再三对新郎说：“先生，上天恩惠，经我鄙陋的媒介，给了你一座无尽的宝藏！你应加意看管，你一辈子已经享用不尽了。”

到了黄昏，涡堤孩温温地将手挽住她丈夫，引他到门口，那时西沉的太阳照着潮润的草和树上的枝叶。这少妇眼里望出来，似乎在那里闪着爱和愁的一簇鲜露，她樱唇上似乎挂着一温柔忧愁的秘密——这秘密的变形能听得见的只有几声叹息.她领着他愈走愈远。他说话的时候，她总是向他痴望，脉脉不语，这里面的消息，是一个纯粹爱情的天堂，世上不知能有多少人领略。他们走到了涨水的涧边，但是这水已经退下，前几日那样汹涌咆哮，如今又回复了平流清浅，他们看了很为惊讶。

“明天，”涡堤孩含着一包眼泪说道，“明天这水可以全退，那时你就可以骑马而去，任你何往，谁也不能阻你。”

骑士哈哈一笑说道：“除非和你一起，我的爱妻呀！就是我想弃你逃走，教堂和国家，牧师和皇帝，也会联合起来，替你将逃犯捉回来的。”

“那是全靠你，那是全靠你。”涡堤孩说着，半泣半笑。“但是我想你一定要我，因为我这样爱你。现在你抱我到对面那小岛上去。我们到那边去定夺。我自己也会渡过去，不过哪里有你抱我在手里有趣，就是你要抛弃我，也让我最后在你怀中甜甜地安歇一次。”

黑尔勃郎被她说得难过，不知道怎样回答好。他抱了她过去到那岛上，他方才认明这小岛就是发水那夜他寻到涡堤孩后来抱她渡水的老地方。他将她一副可爱的负担放在软草上，自己也预备贴紧她坐下去。但是她说：“不是这里，那边，坐在我对面，在你开口之前我先要观察你一双眼。我有话告诉你，留心听着。”于是她开讲——

“我的亲爱的甜心，你一定知道，在四行（水火地木）里面都有一种生灵，他们外面的形状和人一样。只是不很让你们注目他们，在火焰里有那骇异的火灵；土里有细毒的地灵居住；在树林中有树灵，他们的家在空中；在湖海溪涧里有水灵的全族来往。他们的住所在水晶宫里，高大的珊瑚树结满青翠鲜红的果子，在他们园里生长，他们的地上铺满纯洁的海砂和美丽异样的贝壳，古代所有的异宝，和今世不配享受的奇货，都排列在浅蓝波纹的底里，从芦苔花的中间，和舐爱的涓滴结天长地久的姻缘。水灵在此中居住，形象瑰美，大多比人类远胜。渔人打鱼的时候，往往遇见绝美的水姑，出没烟波深处，唱着人间难得的歌儿。他就告诉他同伴说她们长得多美，后来就叫她们涡堤孩。你，此刻，对面坐的你眼里见的就是一个涡堤孩。”



骑士只以为他的娇妻在那里顽皮，造了一大堆话，来和他闹玩笑。但是他虽然这么想，他同时也觉得有些蹊跷，一阵寒噤从他脊骨里布遍全身，他一句话也说不出，只一直对她望着。但是她凄然摇摇头，叹了一声长气，接续又讲——

“我们原来比你们人强得多——然因我们长得和人一式，我们也自以为人——但是有一个大缺点。我们和其余原行里的精灵，我们一旦隐散，就完结，一丝痕迹也不留下，所以你们身后也许醒转来得到更纯粹的生命，我们只不过是泥沙烟云，风浪而已。因为我们没有灵魂：我们所以能行者无非是原行的力，我们生存的辰光也可以自己做主，但是等到一死，原行又将我们化为尘土；我们无愁无虑，欣然来往，好比黄莺、金鱼和一切自然美丽的产儿。但是所有生物都想上达。所以我的父亲，他是地中海里一个有势力的亲王，愿意他的女孩能够得到一个灵魂，去和人类共享艰难愁苦。不过要得灵魂除非能与人发生爱情结为夫妇。现在我有一个灵魂，这个灵魂是你给我的，我最最亲爱的人呀！只要你不使我受苦，我这一辈子和身后的幸福都算了是你的恩典。假使你离弃了我，你想我如何了得？但是我不能勉强你。所以你若然不要我，立刻说出来，你独自走回对岸去就完了。我就往瀑布里一钻，那是我父亲的兄弟，他在这树林过隐士的生活，不很与他族人来往。但是他很有力，比许多大河都强，更尊重些。我到渔人家就是他带来的，那时的我是一个美丽快乐的小孩，他将要仍旧带我回父母去——我，有了灵魂，一个恋爱受苦的妇人。”

她本来还要说下去，但是黑尔勃郎一把搂住了她，充满了热情恋爱，将她抱过岸去。然后他热泪情吻，发誓决不捐弃他的爱妻，并且自以为比希腊故事里的匹马利昂（Pygmalion）更幸福。（匹马利昂崇拜他石塑的女像，后来爱神怜他痴，使石像活了与他成配。）涡堤孩自然心满意足，二人并肩交臂慢慢走回家来，如今她领会了人间美满的恋爱生活，再也不想她的水晶宫和她显焕的父亲了。





第九章　骑士偕其妻同归


明天一早黑尔勃郎醒过来的时候，不见了共衾的涡堤孩，他不觉又疑惧起来。但是他正在胡想，她已经走近身来，吻他一下，坐在床边，说道——

“我今天起得早些，我去见我伯父，问定当一声。他已将水完全收了回去，他现在在树林里幽幽淡淡地流着，重新归复他隐士的生活。他水里空中许多同伴也都休息去了，所以一天星斗全已散消，随你什么时候动身都可以，你穿过树林也足都不会打湿。”

黑尔勃郎还有些恍恍惚惚，前后事实好像一个荒唐大梦，他怎么会同涡堤孩发生了夫妇关系。但是他外貌依旧坦然，不让涡堤孩觉察，况且这样蜜甜一个美妇人，她就是妖精鬼怪要吃他的脑髓他都舍不得逃走哩。后来他们一起站在门口看风景，青草绿水，美日和风，他稳坐在爱情的摇篮里，觉得异常快乐，他说道——

“我们何必一定今天动身呢？一到外边世界上去，我们再也不要想过这样幽静鲜甜的日子。让我们至少再看两三个太阳落山，再去不迟。”

涡堤孩很谦卑地回答说：“悉听主公尊便！就是这对老夫妻总是舍不得离开我的，假使我们再住下去，使他们看见有了灵魂以后的我，充满爱情和尊严的泉流，那时若然分别岂不是害他们连老眼都要哭瞎了吗？现在他们还以为我暂时的平静安详，犹之没有风时候湖里不起波浪一般，我的感情不过像稚嫩的花苗而已。要若然我新生命愈加充满岂不是连累彼此都受更深切的痛苦吗？要是再住下去我这一番变化又如何瞒得过他们呢？”

黑尔勃郎很以为然。他就去见渔翁，告诉他立刻要动身，赶快预备。牧师也愿意一起上路。他们扶了涡堤孩上马，经过那水冲过一块地向森林里进发。涡堤孩吞声饮泣，老夫妻放声大哭。他们就此分别了。

三个人已经进了森林的寂静和深厚的树荫。你看这是多有趣的一幅图画，左右上下是一碧纯青，好像一座绿玉雕成的宫殿，一头锦鞍玉辔的昂昂战马上坐着天仙似的一个美女，一边是神圣高年白袍长袖的老牧师，一边是英武风流遍体金绣的美少年，拥护着缓缓前进。黑尔勃郎一心两眼，只在他娇妻身上。涡堤孩余悲未尽，也将她一汪秋波倾泻在她情人眼里，彼此万缕情丝互相连结。他们走了一阵，旁边忽然发现了一个行客，牧师与他随便招呼了一下。

他穿一件白袍，很像牧师那件祭服，他的帽子一直拉到眼边，他衣服很长，拖了一地，所以他走路都不很方便，时常要用手去整理。等到他对牧师说道——

“神父，我在这树林住了好几年，从来也没有想到人家会叫我隐士。我不知道什么悔罪修道，我也无罪可悔无道可修。我就爱这树林因为他又静又美，我日常在绿荫深处游行徘徊，拖着这件长白袍霍霍作响，偶尔有几线阳光从叶缝里漏下来照着我，我总是无忧无虑，自得其乐。”

牧师答道：“如此说来你是一位很隐僻的人，我很愿意多领教一点。”

他问道：“你老先生又是哪里来的呢？让我们换个题目谈谈。”

神父道：“他们叫我哈哀尔孟神父，我是从湖的那边马利亚格拉司修道院里来的。”

“噢，是吗？”这生客说道，“我的名字叫枯尔庞，人家也叫我枯尔庞男爵；我在这林里同飞鸟一样自由，恐怕比他们还要自由些。我乘便有句话对那女郎说。”

他本来在牧师右边走着，一霎那间他忽然在牧师的左边出现，靠近着涡堤孩，他探起身来向她耳边轻轻说了几句话。但是涡堤孩很惊慌地一缩，说道：“你再也不要缠我。”

“哈哈，”生客笑道，“你倒结得好婚姻，连亲戚都不认了！什么，连你伯父枯尔庞都不理睬，你记不记得他当初背着你到这儿来的？”

涡堤孩答道：“我一定要请求你再也不来见我。我现在很怕你，要是我丈夫见我和这样怪伴在一起，有这样稀奇的亲戚，他不要吃吓吗？”

枯尔庞说道：“胡说！你不要忘记我是你此地的保护人。要不是我，那些地鬼就要来欺侮你。所以让我静静地护住你同走。这老牧师似乎比你还记得我些，方才他告诉我说他看我很面熟，他说他落水时候似乎见我在他近边。对的，当初是我一片水将他从浪里托出来，后来他平安游到岸上。”

涡堤孩和骑士都向着哈哀尔孟神父看，但是他一路走好像做梦，人家说话他也不理。涡堤孩对枯尔庞说——

枯尔庞笑道：“小侄女，你不要忘记我是你此地的保护人。”



“我们快到森林边儿了，我们再也不劳你保护，其实你虽然好意而来，反而使我们害怕。所以求你慈悲，你离开我们去吧。”

但是枯尔庞似乎很不愿意。他将脸子一沉，对着涡堤孩切齿而视，她吓得喊了出来，叫她丈夫保护。电光似一闪，骑士跳到马的那边，举起利刃向枯尔庞头上砍去。但是刀锋没有碰到什么枯尔庞，倒斩着一条滔滔的急流，从一块方石上流将下来，一直冲到他们身上，骤然一响，好像一声怪笑，连他们衣服一齐溅湿。

牧师顿然似乎醒过来，说道：“我早已料到，因为这山边的涧贴紧我们流着。在先我觉得他是个人，能说话。”在黑尔勃郎耳中，这瀑布明明在那里说话——

敏捷的骑士，

壮健的骑士，

我不生气，

我也不闹。

望你永远如此保护你可爱的新娘。

骑士，

你如此壮健，活泼的青年！

不上几步，他们已出了树林。皇城已在他们面前，太阳正在西沉，城里的楼台都好比镀金一样，他们的湿衣服也渐渐晒干。





第十章　他们在城中居住的情形


黑尔勃郎骑士的失踪早已传遍皇城，所有曾经瞻仰过他的风采或是见过他比艺的人都觉得非常忧虑。他的仆人还在城里守着，但是谁也没有胆子进林去冒险寻他，接着又是大水为灾，骑士依旧音信毫无，人人都以为他已遭不幸，培儿托达也自悲蹇运，懊悔当初不该诱他进林探险。她的养父母公爵和爵夫人要来领她回家，但是她劝他们陪她一起，住在城里等骑士是死是生有了确实消息再说。同时另外有许多骑士也和她相识，她也怂恿他们进森林。但是她希望黑尔勃郎生回，所以不敢冒昧以身许人。因此她的悬赏无非是缎带、手套，至多不过一吻，谁也不愿意用性命去拼，而况去寻他们自己的情敌呢？

所以等到黑尔勃郎突然回来，他的仆人不用说，所有城里的居民，单除了培儿托达，没有一个不惊喜交集。尤其因为他带回了一个绝美的新娘，哈哀尔孟神父证婚，大家更觉得高兴，但是培儿托达别有一腔心事，万分忧急。第一因为她到这个时候实在一心一意地爱这青年的骑士，再兼之他失踪期内她焦急的情形大家知道，如今骑士带了妻子回来，大家更要注意她的态度。但是她行为非常大方，丝毫不露痕迹，待涡堤孩也很和气。讲到涡堤孩，人家都以为是哪里国王的公主大概被什么术士咒禁在森林里，此次被骑士救了出来。他们要是再问下去，这对小夫妻或是不答或是将话岔了开去。牧师的口也是金人三缄，并且黑尔勃郎一到就叫人送他回修道院去，所以再也没有人泄露真情，大家只得瞎猜算数，就是培儿托达也想不出其中奥妙。

涡堤孩同培儿托达的交情一天密如一天。她总说：“我们从前一定相识，否则你我之间定有一种很深妙的同情连锁，因为若然没有隐秘的理由，我决计不会得初次见面就这样亲切地爱你。”培儿托达也承认她一见涡堤孩就发生奇样的感情，虽然表面涡堤孩似乎是她得胜的情敌。她们两个人一密切就不愿意分离，一个劝她的养父母，一个劝她的丈夫，大家暂缓行期。后来甚至提议培儿托达送涡堤孩到林斯推顿城堡，在但牛勃河的发源处。

一天愉快的晚上，他们在皇城市场上徘徊，周围都是高树，商量动身的事。时候已经不早，三人尽在星光下散步闲谈，市场中间有一石坛上面一个绝大的喷泉，雕刻也很美丽，水声奔洒沥淅，好比音乐一般，他们看着都说好。树影的背后露出附近人家的光亮，一面一群小孩在那里玩耍，其余偶尔路过的人也很快活。他们三个人说说笑笑，非常得意，日间他们讲起这事似乎觉得还有问题，但是现在一谈，所有困难都完美解决，培儿托达定当和他们同行。但是他们光在那里决定哪一天动身，忽然一个身量高大的人从市场中间走近他们，向他们很客气地鞠了一躬，往涡堤孩耳边轻轻说了句话。她虽然很不愿意这人来打断他们话头，她还是跟了他走开几步，他们开始用很古怪的言语谈话。黑尔勃郎猛然觉得曾经见过这人，他瞪着眼尽向他望出了神，一面培儿托达不懂怎么一回事，很慌张地问他，他也没有听见。一会儿涡堤孩很高兴地拍拍手走了回来。那人一路点头匆匆地退后，走入喷泉里面去了。如今黑尔勃郎心里想他已经明白这意思，但是培儿托达问道：“亲爱的涡堤孩，那‘喷泉人’问你要什么？”

涡堤孩很奥妙地笑着，回答说：“后天你生日你就知道了，你这可爱的孩子！”她再也不能多说。她请培儿托达和她的养父母那天吃饭，他们就分别了。

培儿托达一走开，黑尔勃郎就问他妻子：“枯尔庞吗？”不觉打了一个寒噤，他们慢慢从黑暗的街上走回了家去。

涡堤孩答道：“是的，是他，他想出种种诡计要费我的时光。但是他今夜可告诉我一件事，我听了很欢喜。假使你一定立刻要知道这新闻，我亲爱的主公，你只要命令一声，我就一字不遗地讲给你听。但是你若然愿意给你的涡堤孩一个很大很大的欢喜，请你等到后天，听我出其不意当众报告。”

骑士乐得做个人情，当时也就不追问。那天晚上涡堤孩睡梦中，还在那里呓语道：“后天她要知道了这‘喷泉人’的新闻，培儿托达这孩子不知道是多少欢喜，多少惊异哩！”





第十一章　培儿托达的生日


那天涡堤孩请客，主客都已入席。培儿托达遍戴珍珠花朵，朝外坐着，光艳四照，好比春季的女神，她的两旁是涡堤孩和黑尔勃郎。等得正菜吃过，点心送上来时，德国旧时习惯，照例直开大门，好使外边人望进来看见，是与众共乐的意思。仆役拿盘托着酒和糕饼分给他们。黑尔勃郎和培儿托达都急于要知这涡堤孩答应报告的消息，老是望着她。但是她不加理睬，独自眯眯笑着只当没有那回事。和她熟悉的人，见得出她欢容满面，两叶樱唇，喜矜矜好像时常要吐露她忍着的秘密，但是她盘马弯弓故意不发，好比小孩难得吃到一块甜食，舍不得一起咽下，含含舐舐，还要摸出来看看。黑尔勃郎和培儿托达明知她在那里卖关子，可也没有法想，只得耐着，心里怦怦地跳动，静等这乖乖献宝。同座有几个人请涡堤孩唱歌。她很愿意，叫人去取过她的琴来，弹着唱道——

朝气一何清，

花色一何妍，

野草香且荣兮，

苍茫在湖水之边！

灿灿是何来！

岂其白华高自天，

跌入草田裾前哉？

呀！是个小孩蜜蜜甜！

蜜蜜甜无知亦无愆，

攀花折草儿自怜，

晨光一色黄金鲜，

铺遍高陌和低阡。

何处儿从来？

蜜饯的婴孩，

儿从何处来？

远从彼岸人不知，

湖神载儿渡水来。

儿呀！草梗有刺棘，

小手嫩如芽，

儿切莫乱抓，

草不解儿意，

花亦不儿语，

红红紫紫徒自媚，

花心开蕤香粉坠，

儿亦无人哺，

饥饿复奈何，

儿以无娘胸，

谁唱“罗拉”歌；

阿儿初自天堂来，

仙福犹留眉宇间，

问儿父母今何在，

乖乖但解笑连连。

看呀！大公昂藏骑马来，

收缰停马止儿前，

锦绣园林玉楼台，

儿今安食复安眠，

无边幸福谢苍天，

儿今长成美复贤，

唯怜生身父母不相见，

此恨何时方可消。

涡堤孩唱到此处琴声戛然而止，她微微一笑，眼圈儿还红着。培儿托达的养父母公爵和爵夫人也听得一包眼泪。公爵很感动，说道：“那天早上我寻到你，你可怜蜜甜的孤儿，的确是那样情形！歌唱得一点不错，我们还没有给你最大的幸福。”

涡堤孩说道：“但是你们应该知道那两老可怜的情形。”她又拨动了琴弦唱道——

娘入房中寻儿踪，

鼠穴虫家尽搜穷，

阿娘泪泻汪洋海，

不见孩儿总是空。

儿失房空最可伤，

培儿托达



光阴寸寸压娘肠，

哭笑咿呀犹在耳，

昨宵儿摇入睡乡。

门前掬实又新芽，

明媚春光透碧纱，

阿娘觅儿儿不见，

满头飞满白杨花。

白日西沉静暮晖，

鹧鸪声里阿翁归，

为怜老妻犹强笑，

低头不觉泪沾衣。

阿父知是兆不祥，

森林阴色召灾殃，

如今只有号啕母，

不见娇儿嬉筐床。

“看上帝面上，涡堤孩，究竟我父母在哪里？”培儿托达哭着说，“你一定知道，你真能干，你一定已经寻到了他们，否则你决计不会使我这样伤心。他们也许就在此地？会不会是——”

她说到这里，向同席的贵人望了一转，她眼光停住在一个皇室贵妇身上，她坐在公爵夫妇旁边。涡堤孩站起来走到门口，她两眼充满了极剧的感情。

“然则我可怜的生身父母究竟在哪里呢？”她问道，说着老渔人和他妻子从门前群众里走了出来。他们的眼，好像急于问讯，一会儿望着涡堤孩，转过去又看着遍体珠罗的培儿托达，两老心里早已明白她就是他们遗失的爱女。“是她。”涡堤孩喜得气都喘不过来，这一对老夫妇就饿虎奔羊似的赶上去抱住了培儿托达，眼泪鼻涕，上帝天父，斗个不休。

但是培儿托达又骇又怒，推开了他们向后倒退。她正在那里盼望发现出一对天潢贵胄的父母，来增加她的荣耀，她又生性高傲，哪里能承认这一双老惫低微的贱民。她忽然心机一动，想不错，一定是她的情敌安排的诡计，打算在黑尔勃郎和家人面前羞辱她的。她一脸怒容向着涡堤孩，她又恨恨地望着那一对手足无措的老百姓。她开口就骂涡堤孩摆布她，骂渔翁夫妻是钱买来索诈的。老太太自言自语地说道：“上帝呀，这原来是个恶女人，但是我心里觉得生她的是我。”渔翁捻紧了手，低头祷告，希望她不是他们的女儿。涡堤孩一场喜欢，如今吓得面如土色，睁大了眼看看这个，又看看那个，她再也料不到有这场结果。

“你有没有灵性？你究竟有灵魂没有，培儿托达喂！”她对她发怒的朋友说，好像疑心她在那里发魇，是失落了神智，想唤她醒来。但是培儿托达愈闹愈凶，被拒的一对不幸父母爽性放声大号，看客也都上来各执一是，吵个不休，涡堤孩一看神气不对，她就正颜严色吩咐有事到她丈夫房里去讲，大家都住了口。她走到桌子的上首，就是培儿托达坐的地方，大家的目光都注着她，她侃侃地演说道——

“你们如此愤愤地对她看，你们吵散了我畅快的筵席，唉！上帝，我再也想不到你会这样蠢，这样硬心肠，我一辈子都猜不透什么缘故。如今结果到如此田地，可并不是我的错处。相信我，这是你的不是，虽然你自己不肯承认。我也没有话对你说，但是有一件事我要声明——我没有说谎，我虽然没有事实上的证据，但是我所说的我都可以发誓保证。告诉我这件事的不是旁人，就是当初将她诱入水去，后来又将她放在草地上使公爵碰到的那个。”

“她是个妖女！”培儿托达顿然叫了出来，“她是个女巫，她同恶鬼来往！她自己承认的！”

“那个我不承认，”涡堤孩答道，她满眼自信和纯洁可敬的神情，“我不是女巫。你们只要看我就明白。”

培儿托达接口说：“然则她造谎恫吓，她不能证明我是那些贱民的女儿。我公爵的父母，我求你们领了我出这群人出这城子，他们只是欺侮诬毁我！”

但是高尚的公爵依旧站着不动。爵夫人说道：“我们总要明白这回事。天父在上，此事若不是水落石出，我决不离此室。”

于是渔人的妻子走到她旁边，深深福了一福。说道——

“我在你高贵敬天的夫人面前，披露我的心。我一定得告诉你，若然这恶姑娘是我的女儿，她的两肩中间有一点紫罗兰色的记认，还有她左足背上也有一点。只要她愿意跟我出这个厅堂去——”

培儿托达抗声说道：“我不愿意在那个村妇面前解衣。”

“但是在我面前你是愿意的，”爵夫人很严厉地说道，“你跟我到那里房里去，这仁善的老太太也来。”

三个人出去了，堂上剩下的人鸦雀无声地静候分晓。过了一会儿，他们回了进来，培儿托达面无人色，爵夫人说道——

“不错总是不错，我所以声明今天女主人所说的都已证实。培儿托达的确是渔人夫妇的女儿，大概你们旁观人所要知道者也尽于此。”

爵爷和夫人领了他们养女走了出去，爵爷示意渔人和他妻子也跟了去。其余都私下议论。涡堤孩一肚子委屈，向黑尔勃郎怀里一倒放声悲泣。

“她的两肩中间有一点紫罗兰色的记认，还有她左足背上也有一点。”





第十二章　他们从皇城动身旅行


林斯推顿的爵士（黑尔勃郎）并不愿意那天纷乱的情形。但是事实上既已如此，他反而觉得很满意，因为他的娇妻临事如此忠实、恳切、尊严。他心里想：“如其我果然给了她一个灵魂，我给她一个比我自己的还强些。”他所以赶快来慰藉悲伤的涡堤孩，打算明天就动身，因为出了这桩事体以后，她对于这地方也不会再有多大兴趣。但是舆情对于她还是没有改变。非常事实的发现往往有些预兆，所以培儿托达来源的证明也没有引起多大的惊异，众人很多反对她，因为那天她行为过于暴烈。但是他们夫妻不很知道这情形。他们再也不愿多麻烦，所以三十六策走为上策。

明天一早一驾清洁的马车已经在客寓门口等涡堤孩。黑尔勃郎和他从人的马也都预备好了。骑士刚领着他夫人走出门来，一个渔装女郎走了上来。

黑尔勃郎说道：“我们不要你的货，我们正在动身。”

女郎啜泣起来，他们才觉察她是培儿托达。他们领了她重新进去，一问才知道公爵夫妇怪她那天行为过于焦躁，不愿意继续养她，虽然给了她一份很厚的嫁奁。渔人夫妇受了他们奖赏，那天晚上已经回他们天地去了。

“我想跟他们同回去，”她接着说，“但这老渔人，人家说他是我父亲——”

“他们说的不错，培儿托达，”涡堤孩插口道，“那天你以为‘喷泉人’者确实对我说的。他叫我不要领你一起回林斯推顿城堡去，所以他泄露这机密。”

“然则，”培儿托达说，“我的父——既然如此——我的父说道：‘我不要你，除非你脾气改过。你要跟我们独身穿过这树林，那才证明你爱我们。但是不要再摆女爵主架子，你要来就是个渔娘。’我很想听他吩咐，因为全世界都已经不认识我，我愿意和我穷苦的父母独自过一世渔家女的生活。但是，老实说，我实在不敢进森林去。里面多是妖精鬼怪，我又如此胆小。但是有什么办法呢？我此时无非来向林斯推顿的贵妇赔罪，求她饶恕我前天种种无礼。夫人呀！我知道你是一番好意，但是你不知道我听了你的话好像受伤一样，我又骇又怒，忍不住滚出了许多鲁莽疯狂的说话。宽恕我吧！宽恕我吧！我是如此十分倒运。你只要替我设身处地想想，昨天开宴之前，我是如何身份，但是我今天呢？”

她涕泗滂沱说了这一番话，她的手抱住了涡堤孩的项颈。她也感动得半晌说不出话来，但是末了她说——

“你跟我们一起到林斯推顿去吧，一切都照我们前天的预算，只要你仍旧叫我的名字，不要什么夫人呀、贵妇呀闹不清楚。你要知道我们从小的时候彼此交换，但是从今以后我们住在一起，再没有人力能够分散我们。但是第一件事就是你陪我们去林斯推顿。我们犹如姊妹一样，有福同享，快在此决定吧。”

培儿托达满面羞容瞟过眼去望着黑尔勃郎。他看她受了这样委屈，早动了恻隐之心，连忙伸出手来挽住了她，亲亲切切地请她放心，他们夫妇总不会亏待她。

他说：“我们会派人去关照你父母为什么你不回家。”他接着替那对老夫妇想法子，但是他觉得培儿托达一听见提起她父母就双眉紧蹙，他就将话岔了开去，再也不提。他就携着她手，送她上车，其次涡堤孩，自己骑上马，并着她们的车欣欣上路，一会儿出了皇城，将种种不快意的经历一起弃在后面。二位女眷坐在车上也说说笑笑，吸着新鲜空气，浏览着乡间景色。

赶了几天路程，他们一天傍晚到了林斯推顿的城堡。所有的侍从一齐上来拥住了他们幼主，交待一切，所以涡堤孩独自和培儿托达一起。她们爬上了堡塞的高墙，赏玩下面希华皮亚的景色。忽然一个高人走了上来，对她们恭恭敬敬行了个礼，培儿托达猛然记起了那晚皇城市场上所见的喷泉人。涡堤孩旋过去向他一看，露出不愿意带着威吓的神色，培儿托达想一定就是那怪，正在惊疑，那人一路点头，匆匆退下，隐入邻近一座灌木林中去了。但是涡堤孩说道：“不要怕，亲爱的小培儿托达，这一次他再也不会来缠你了。”

她于是从头至尾将这段故事一齐讲了出来，她自己是谁，培儿托达如何离开她的父母，她自己如何到他们那里去。培儿托达开头听了很吓，她以为她朋友忽然疯了，但是她愈听愈信，恍然明白。她想想真奇怪，从小听见的荒唐故事，如今非但亲身经历，而且自身受了一二十年的播弄，方才打破这谜。她很尊敬地看着涡堤孩，但是禁不住发了一个寒噤，总觉得她是异类。一直等到他们坐下吃夜饭，她心里还在那里疑虑黑尔勃郎如何会得同鬼怪一类东西发生恋爱。





第十三章　他们居住在林斯推顿城堡时的情形


写下这故事来的人，因为他自己心里很受感动，所以希望人家看了也可以一样感动，但是他要向读者诸君道一个歉。他要请你们原谅，如其他现在用很简的话报告你们在一长时期内所发生的事件。他明知道他很可以描写如何一步一步黑尔勃郎的爱情渐渐从涡堤孩移到培儿托达，如何培儿托达的热度逐渐增高和他做爱，如何他们合起非但不可怜涡堤孩，而且视为异族，逐渐地疏忽她，如何涡堤孩悲伤，如何她的眼泪和骑士良心上戳刺，再也不能回复他从前对她的恋爱，所以虽然他有时对她还和气，一会儿又发了一个寒噤，抛开了她，去和真人的女郎培儿托达寻欢谈爱。作者很知道这几点都可以，并且也许是应该，从详叙述，但是他心肠硬不起来，因为他生平也有过同样的经验，如今想起了，心里还像锥刺，眼泪如面条一般挂将下来，何况动手来写呢？亲爱的读者呀！大概你们也免不了有同样的感觉吧？人世间的趣味原应该用痛苦来测量。假使你在这行业里面，你所得的痛苦比你给人的痛苦来得多，你就赚了钱，发了财。因为在这类情形之下，所有唯一的感觉，无非你灵魂中心窝里蜿蜒着几丝蜜甜的悲伤，精美的幽郁，或者你想到了那一处园里湖上从前是你销魂的背景，如今都如梦如寐，渺若山河，你鼻脊里就发出一阵奇酸，两朵水晶似泪花，从眼眶里突了出来，慢慢在你双颊上开了两条水沟。好了，我也不再多说下去，我并不愿意将你们的心刺成千疮百孔，让我言归正传，简简地接着讲吧。

可怜的涡堤孩异常悲伤，而他们两个也并不真正快乐，但是培儿托达还不满意。她于是逐渐地专制跋扈起来，涡堤孩总是退让，再加之一个情热的黑尔勃郎处处总袒护她。同时城堡里生活也反常起来，到处有鬼灵出现，黑尔勃郎和培儿托达时常碰到，但是以前从来也没有听见过。那个高白人，黑尔勃郎是很熟悉了，认识是枯尔庞，培儿托达也知是喷泉怪，也时常在他们二人跟前出现恫吓，尤其欺凌培儿托达，她有一次甚至吓得害病，所以她时常决意要离开这城堡。但是她依旧住下去，一部分为她恋爱黑尔勃郎，一部分因为她自恃清白，就有鬼怪也没奈何她，并且她也不知道往哪里去好。这老渔人自从接到了林斯推顿爵士的信告诉他培儿托达和他一起住着，他就乱七八糟写了一封回信，他一辈子也不知写过几封信，他的文字之难读可想而知。他信里说道——

“我现在变了一个孤身老头，因为我亲爱忠信的妻子已经到上帝那里去了。但是我虽然寂寞！我情愿有培儿托达的空房不希望她回来。只要你警戒她不要伤损我亲爱的涡堤孩，否则我就咒她。”

这几句话培儿托达只当耳边风，但是她可记得她父亲叫她住在外面，这种情形本来很普通的。

有一天黑尔勃郎骑马去了，涡堤孩召集了家里的仆役，吩咐他们去拿一大块石头来盖塞了堡庭中间华美的喷泉。仆役们抗议因为喷泉塞住了，他们要到下边山石里去取水。涡堤孩显出忧伤的笑容，说道——

“我很抱歉使你们要多忙些，我很情愿自己下山去取水，但是这喷泉非关塞不可。听我的话，再没有旁的办法。我们虽然有些不方便，但是我们可以免了很大的不幸。”

所有的仆役都高兴女主人如此和气诚恳，他们再也不抗议，一齐下去扛了一块大的石块上来。他们刚放下地，预备去盖住泉眼，培儿托达跑将过来，喊着止住他们。她每天自己也用这泉水洗涤，所以她不答应将它关塞。但是平常虽然总是涡堤孩让步，这一步她却不放松。她说她既然是一家的主妇，一切家里的布置当然要照她吩咐，除了爵主以外她不准第二人干涉。

“但是你看，哼！看吧！”培儿托达叫道，又恼又急——“看，这可怜的水缠绕地喷着，似乎它知道要遭劫，它再也不得见阳光，再也不能像镜子似的反照人面。”她正说着，这水突然高冲，发出尖利的响，好像有东西在里面挣扎着要冲出来似的，但是涡堤孩益发坚定地命令立刻下手封盖。这班下人很愿意一面讨好女主人，一面惹怒培儿托达，也不管她大声狂吼恫吓，他们七手八脚一会儿将这泉口掩住。涡堤孩倚在上面沉思了一会儿，伸出她尖尖的玉指在石面上写了好些。但是她一定在手中藏着一种尖利的器具，因为她一走开，人家过去看的时候只见上面刻着种种奇形的文字，谁都不认识。

黑尔勃郎晚上回家，培儿托达接住了他，淌着眼泪抱怨涡堤孩的行径。他怒目向着他妻子，但是她，可怜的涡堤孩，很忧伤地敛下了她的眼睫。然后她平心静气地说道——

“我的主公和丈夫，就是定罪，一奴仆也给他一声辩的机会。何况他自己正式的妻子呢？”

“那么你说，为什么你有这样奇异行为？”骑士说着，满面霜气。

涡堤孩叹口气说道：“我不能在人前对你说。”

他答道：“培儿托达在这里你告诉我还不是一样？”

“是，假使你如此命令我，”涡堤孩说，“但是你不要命令。我求恳你，不要如此命令。”

她说得又谦卑，又和气，又顺从，骑士的心里忽然回复了从前快乐日子的一线阳光。他执住了她的手，引她到他的房里，她于是说道——

“你知道我们凶恶的枯尔庞伯父，我亲爱的主公，你也时常在堡塞的廊下受他的烦扰，是不是？他有时甚至将培儿托达吓出病来。看起来他并没有灵魂，他无非是一个外界原行的镜子，在这里面照不出内部的境界。他只见你时常和我不和睦，见我一个人为此时常哭泣，见培儿托达偏拣那个时候欢笑。结果是他想象了许多愚笨的见解，要动手来干涉我们。我就是抱怨他叫他走，又有什么用？他完全不相信我的话。他卑微的本性估量不到爱情的苦乐有这样的密切关系，两件事差不多就是一件事，要分开他们是不成功的。笑是从泪湿的心里出来，泪是从喜笑的眼里出来。”

她仰起来望着黑尔勃郎，娇啼欢笑，一霎那从前恋爱的速力又充满了骑士的心坎。她也觉得，将他搂紧在胸前，依旧淌着欢喜的眼泪接着说道——

“既然扰乱治安的人不肯听话，我没有法想，只得将门堵住不许他再进来。而他接近我们唯一的路就是那喷泉。他和邻近的水灵都有仇怨。从再过去的一个山谷，一直到但牛勃河如其他的亲知流入那河，那边又是他的势力范围了。所以我决定将喷泉封盖起，我在上面还写着符咒，如此他也不会来干涉你，或是我，或是培儿托达。固然只要小小用些人力就可以将那块石盖移去，又没有什么拦阻。假使你愿意，尽管照培儿托达主意做去，但是你要知道她再也想不到她执意要的是什么东西。枯尔庞那福（祸）根尤其特别注意她，要是他时常对我所预言的果然有朝发现，难说得很，我爱，要知道事体不是儿戏呢！”

黑尔勃郎听了很感激他妻子的大量，她想尽种种方法，将她自己的亲人摒斥，为的非但是一家的安宁，并且也体谅到培儿托达。

他将她抱入怀中很动感情地说道：“那块石头准它放上，从此谁也不许移动，一切听你，我最甜美的小涡堤孩。”

她也软软地抱紧他，心里觉得天堂似的快乐，因为夫妻生疏了好久，难得又听见了这样爱膏情饯的口吻。二人着实绸缪了一下，最后她说道——

“我最亲爱的一个，你今天既然这样甜美温和，可否让我再恳一个情？你只要自己知道，你同夏天一样，就是阳光照耀的时光，说不定云章一扯起，风雨雷电立刻就到眼前。这固然是自然的威灵，犹之人间的帝王。你近来动不动就发脾气，开口看人都是严厉得很，那固然很合你身份，虽然我总免不了孩子气，往往一个人哭泣，但是请你从今以后千万不要在近水地方和我发气，因为水里都是我的亲戚，他们无知无识只见我被人欺凌就要来干涉，他们有力量将我劫了回去，那时我再也不得出头，这一辈子就离不了水晶宫殿，再也不能和你见面，就是他们再将我送回来，那时我更不知如何情形。所以求你，我的甜心，千万不要让这类事发生，因为你爱你可怜的涡堤孩。”

他郑重答应听她的话，于是夫妇一同走出房来，说不尽的畅快，彼此充满了恋爱。培儿托达走过来，带了好几个工人，一脸怒容说道——

“算了，秘密会议已经完毕，石头也可以搬走了。去，你们去扛下来。”

但是骑士很不满意她如此跋扈，放了脸子，简简说道：“石头准她盖上。”他接着说培儿托达不应与涡堤孩龌龊。那群工人一看如此形景，暗暗好笑，各自搭讪着走了开去。培儿托达气得面色发青，旋转身奔向她自己房中去了。

晚饭时间到了，培儿托达还不出来。他们就差人去看她，但是她房中空空，只留下一封信给骑士。他骇然拆封，读道——

“渔家贱婢，安敢忘形。孟浪之罪，无可祷也。径去穷舍，忏悔余生。夫人美慧，君福无涯。”

涡堤孩深为愁闷。她很热心地催黑尔勃郎赶快去寻回他们的逃友。其实何必她着急呢？他从前对培儿托达的感情重新又醒了过来。他立刻电掣似的遍查堡内，问有人曾见女郎下山否。大家都不知道，他已经在庭中上了马，预备沿着他们当初来路寻去。刚巧有人上山来报告说，有一女郎下山，向“黑谷”而去。箭离弦似的，骑士已经驰出了堡门，往“黑谷”追去，再也听不见窗口涡堤孩很焦急地喊道——

“到黑谷去吗？不是那边，黑尔勃郎，不是那边！就是要去也领我同去！”

但是他早已影踪毫无，她赶快叫人预备她的小马，放足缰绳，独自追他去了。





第十四章　培儿托达偕骑士回家的情形


黑谷深藏在万山之中，人迹罕到之处。邻近居民以其隐秘故名之曰黑谷，其中深林箐密，尤多松树。就是山缝里那条小河也是黑蔚蔚地流着，似乎紧锁眉头，幽幽地声诉不见天日之苦。现在太阳早已落山，只剩了黄昏微茫，那山林深处，益发来得荒惨幽秘。骑士慌慌张张沿着河岸前进，他一会儿又怕跑得太匆忙，跑过了她的头；一会儿又急急加鞭，防她走远了。他此时入谷已深，照理他路如其没有走错，他应该就赶上那步行的女郎。他一肚子胡思乱想，深恐培儿托达迷失。他想她一个娇情的女孩，如今黑夜里在这荒谷中摸路，天色又危险得很，暴风雨就在眼前，要是他竟寻不到她，那便如何是好。最后他隐隐望见前面山坡上一个白影子，在树荫里闪着。他想这是培儿托达的衣裙，他赶快想奔过去。但是他的马忽然倔强，使劲地后退，骑士不想浪费时间而且在树堆里寻路又麻烦，骑士急得跳下马来，将马缚在一棵枫树上，独自辟着丛草前进。他眉毛上颊上滴满了树枝的露水，山头雷声已起，一阵凉风，呼的一声刮得满林的枝叶，吼的吼，叫的叫，啸的啸，悲鸣的悲鸣，由不得骑士打了一个寒噤，觉得有点心慌。好容易他望过了那白影子，似乎有人晕倒在地，但是他决不定那一堆白衣是否培儿托达那天穿的。他慢慢走近跟前，摇着树枝，击着他刀——她不动。

“培儿托达！”他开头轻轻地叫了一声，没有回音，他愈叫愈响——她还是听不见一样，寂无声息。他便尽力气叫了一声“培儿托达”！隐隐山壁里发出很凄凉的回音：“培——儿——托——达。”但是躺着那个人依旧不动。他于是伛了下去，偏是夜色已深，他也辨不出他的眉目。但是现在他有点疑心起来，用手向那一堆去一撩，刚巧一阵闪电将全谷照得铄亮。他不看还可，一看只见一只奇形异丑的脸子，听他阴惨的声音说道——

“来接吻吧，你相思病的牧童！”

黑尔勃郎吓得魂不附体，大叫一声，转身就跑，那丑怪在后面追。“家去吧！”他幽幽说着，“那群妖怪醒了！家去吧！哈哈！如今你逃哪里去！”他伸过一双长白臂去抓他。

“丑鬼枯尔庞！”骑士提起胆子喊道，“原来是你这鬼怪！这里有个吻给你！”说着他就挥刀向他脸上直砍。但是他忽然变成一堆水，向骑士冲来。

骑士现在明白了枯尔庞的诡计，他高声自言道：“他想威吓我抛弃培儿托达，我要一回头，那可怜无告的女孩，岂非落入他手，受他魔虐，那还了得。但是没有那回事，你丑陋的水怪，谅你也不知道人心的能力多大。他要是将生命的势力一齐施展出来，谁也没奈何他，何况你区区的精灵。”他一说过顿觉胆气一壮，精神陡旺。说也凑巧，他运气也到门了。他还没有走到他缚马的地点，他明明听见了培儿托达悲咽的声浪。她就在他左近，所以他在雷雨交加之中能听出她泣声。骑士似获至宝，展步如飞往发声处寻去，果然觅到了培儿托达，浑身发战，用尽力气想爬过一山峰，逃出黑谷的荒暗。他迎面拦住了她，那孩子虽然骄傲坚决，到了这个时候，由不得不惊喜交集，她心爱的人果然还有良心冒着黑夜电雨，赶来救她出此荒惨可怕的环境。一面骑士说上许多软话央她回去。她再也不能推辞，默不作声跟了他就走。但是她娇养惯的如何经得起这一番恐慌跋涉，好容易寻到了那马，她已经是娇喘不胜，再也不能动弹。骑士从树上解下了马缰，预备挟他可爱的逃犯上马，自己牵着缰索向黑荫里赶路回家。

培儿托达在黑谷



但是这马也教枯尔庞吓得慌张失度，连骑士自己都上不了马背，要将培儿托达稳稳抬上去绝对不能。他们没有法想，只得步行上道。骑士一手拉着马缰，一手挽住踉跄的培儿托达，她也很想振作起来，好早些走出这黑谷，但是她四肢百骸多像棉花一般再也团不拢来，浑身只是瑟瑟地乱颤，一半因为方才一阵子趁着火性身入险地，行路既难，枯尔庞又尽跟着为难，吓得她芳心寸乱，此时虽然神志清楚一点，但是满山隆隆的雷响，树林里发出种种怪声，闪电又金蛇似的横扫，可怜培儿托达如何还能奋勇走路。

结果她从骑士的手中瘫了下去，横在萆苔上面，喘着说道：“让我倒在此地吧，高贵的先生呀！我只抱怨自己愚蠢，如今我筋疲力竭，让我死在此地吧！”

“决不，决不，我的甜友呀，我决不抛弃你！”黑尔勃郎喊道，一面使尽气力扣住那匹马，现在它慌得更厉害，浑身发汗，口里吐沫，骑士无法，只得牵了它走开几步，因为恐怕它践踏了她。但是培儿托达以为他果真将她弃在荒野，叫着他名字放声大哭起来，他实在不知道怎样才好。他很愿意一撒手让那咆哮的畜生自由向黑夜里乱冲去，但是又怕他的铁蹄，落在培儿托达身上。

正在左右为难，踌躇不决，他忽然听见一辆货车从他背后的石路上走来，他这一喜，简直似天开眼了一般，他大声喊救。那边人声回答他，叫他别急，就来招呼他。不到一会儿，他果然看见两只斑白的牲口从丛草里过来，那车夫穿一件白色的外衣，一车的货物，上面盖住一块大白布。那车夫高声喊了一个“拔尔”，牲口就停了下来。他走过来帮骑士收拾那唾沫的马。

“我知道了，”他说，“这畜生要什么。我初次经过此地，我的牲口也是一样的麻烦。我告诉你这里有一个恶水怪，他故意捣乱，看了乐意。但是我学了一个咒语，你只要让我向你牲口耳边一念，他立刻就平静，你信不信？”

“好，你快试你的秘诀吧！”焦躁的骑士叫道。他果然跑到那马口边去念了个咒语。一会儿这马俯首帖耳平静了下来，只有满身的汗依旧淌着。黑尔勃郎也没有工夫去问他其中奥妙。他和车夫商量，要他将培儿托达载在他车上货包上面，送到林斯推顿城堡，他自己想骑马跟着。但是那马经过一阵暴烈，也是垂头丧气，再也没有力量驮人。所以车夫叫他也爬上车去，和培儿托达一起，那匹马他缚在车后。

“我的牲口拉得动。”车夫说。骑士就听他的话，和培儿托达都爬上货堆，马在后面跟着，车夫很谨慎地将车赶上路去。

如今好了，风雷也已静止，黑夜里寂无声息，人也觉得平安了，货包又软，也没有什么不舒服，黑尔勃郎和培儿托达就开始讲话彼此吐露心腹。他笑她脾气这样大，搅出一天星斗，培儿托达也羞怯怯地道歉。但是他句句话里都显出恋爱的光亮，她心坎里早已充满了那最神秘的质素，如今止不住流露出来。骑士也是心领神会，寻味无穷，一张细密的情网轻轻将他们裹了进去。

两人正在得趣，那车夫忽然厉声喊道：“起来！牲口！你们举起脚来！牲口，起劲一点！别忘了你们是什么！”

骑士探起头来一望，只见那马简直在一洼水里泅着，车轮像水车一般地转，车夫也避那水势，爬上了车。

“这是什么路呢？倒像在河身里走，怎么回事？”黑尔勃郎喊着问那赶车的。

“不是，先生！”他笑着答道，“不是我们走到河里，倒是河水走到我们路上来。你自己看，好大的水泛。”他的话是对的，果然满谷都是水，水还尽涨着。

“那是枯尔庞，那好恶的水怪。你有什么咒语去对付他没有？我的朋友。”

“我知道一个，”赶车的道，“但是我不能行用它，除非你知道我是谁。”

“谁还和你开玩笑？”骑士叫道，“那水愈涨愈高，我管得你是谁。”

“但是你应得管，”赶车的道，“因为我就是枯尔庞。”说着他一阵狂笑，将他的丑脸探进车来，但是一阵子车也没有了，牲口也不见了，什么东西都消化到烟雾里，那车夫自己变成一个大浪，嘭的一声将后面挣扎着的马卷了进去。他愈涨愈高，一直涨得水塔似的一座，预备向黑尔勃郎和培儿托达头上压下，使他们永远葬身水窟。

但是在这间不容发的危机时刻，涡堤孩干脆的声音忽然打入他们耳鼓，月亮也从云端里露了出来，涡堤孩在山谷上面峰上站着。她厉声命令，她威吓这水，凶恶的水塔渐渐缩了下去，呜呜地叫着，河水也平静下去，反射着雪白的月色。涡堤孩白鸽似的从高处抢了下来，拉住了黑尔勃郎和培儿托达，将他们带上高处草地，她起劲安慰他们。她扶培儿托达上她骑来的小白马，三人一起回家。





第十五章　维也纳旅行


经过了这一番捣乱，城堡里过了好一时安静生活。骑士也愈加敬爱他妻子的神明甜美，这回拼着命救他们出枯尔庞和黑谷的险。涡堤孩光明磊落，自然心神舒泰，并且因为丈夫的感情回复，她尤其觉得安慰。培儿托达受了这次经验，形迹上也改变了好多，她骄恣的习气，换成了温和知感的情景，她好胜的故态也不复显著。每当他们夫妻讲到塞绝喷泉或是黑谷冒险两桩事，她总很和婉地求他们不要提起，因为前一件事使她窘愧，后一件事使她害怕。本来两事都成陈迹，原无讨论之必要。所以林斯推顿堡里，只见平安欢乐。大家心里也都如此想，望到将来好像满路都是春花秋果。

如此冬去春来，风和日暖。人人也都欣喜快乐，只见百花怒放，梁燕归来，由不得动了旅行的雅兴。

有一次，他们正谈到但牛勃河的源流，黑尔勃郎本来地理知识很丰富，他就大讲起那条大河之美，如何发源，如何流注许多名地，如何百川贯注，如何两岸都是灿烂的葡萄，如何这河流步步佳胜，到处都展览自然的力量和美德。

“要是循流下去直到维也纳，这水程才痛快哩！”培儿托达听得高兴不过喊将起来，但是她话还没有说完，已经觉察了莽撞，连忙收敛，默默地两颊红晕。

这一下触动了涡堤孩的慈悲心，很想满足她爱友的愿望，接着说道——

“那么我们去就是，谁还拦阻我们不成？”

培儿托达喜得直跳，张开一张小口，再也合不拢来，两个人赶快用颜色来画他们畅游但牛勃河的水程。黑尔勃郎也不反对，他只对涡堤孩私语道——

“但是我们如其走得这样远，枯尔庞会不会再来和我们麻烦呢？”

“让他来好了！”她笑答道，“有我在这儿，他什么法儿也没有。”

所以他们绝无困难，他们立刻预备，欣欣出发，打算畅畅快快玩一趟。

这岂不是奇怪，大凡我们希望一件事怎么样，结果往往正得其反？不祥的势力预备害我们的时候，偏爱用种种甜美的歌儿、黄金似的故事，引我们高枕安眠。反之那报喜消息的天使往往选顶尴尬的时间，出其不意来打门，吓得我们空起惊慌。

他们游但牛勃河开头这几天，的确欣喜快乐。一路的景色，美不胜收，步步引人入胜。但是一天到了一处特别妩媚的地点，他们正想细细赏览，那可厌的枯尔庞，突然又来作怪。最初他无非卖弄他的小诡计，招惹他们，涡堤孩生了气，向着逆风怪浪，一顿呼喝，果然敌势退了下去，但是等不到好久，那玩意儿又来了，又得涡堤孩去对付，如是者再而三，他们虽然没有吃亏，一团的游兴可被他打得稀烂。

船家也起了疑心，彼此互相私语，向着他们三人尽望。他们的侍从也觉得大家所处的地位很不妥当，也看着主人，露出张皇态度。黑尔勃郎口上不言心里在那里想道——

“这是结交异类的报应，人和人鱼结婚好不奇怪。”

他又自己解释，想道——

“我当初并不知道她是个人鱼！算我晦气，步步碰到这荒谬的亲戚，但是过处不在我。”

他一肚子这类思想，辩护自己，但是他想的结果，非但没有安慰，而且移怒到涡堤孩身上。他恨恨地望着她，可怜的涡堤孩也完全明白他意思。她一面对付枯尔庞已经精神疲乏，又遭黑尔勃郎一顿白眼，诉说无从，只得暗吞珠泪，等到黄昏时节，风平浪定，她睡熟了。

但是她刚刚闭眼睛，船上人立刻又起惊慌。因为大家眼里见一个可怕的人头从小浪里穿出来，不像平常泅水的人头，恰直挺挺装在水面上，并着船同等速率进行。大家惨然相顾，吓得话都说不出来。尤奇者任你往什么方向看，你总看见一个狞笑奇凶的头面。你说“看那边”，他说“看那边”，总之一阵子船的左右前后，水面上顿然开了一个人头展览会，一河阴风惨色，吓得大家狂叫起来。涡堤孩从睡梦中惊觉，她刚一张眼，所有的怪现象立刻消灭。但是黑尔勃郎受此戏弄，忍不住心头火起，他正想发作，涡堤孩满眼可怜，低声下气求道——

“看上帝面上吧，丈夫！我们在水面上，你千万不可与我发怒。”

骑士默然不语，坐了下去，在那里出神。涡堤孩向他私语道——

“我爱，我们就此为止，平安回林斯推顿何如？”

但是黑尔勃郎愤愤说道——

“如此我倒变了自己城堡里一个囚犯，要是打开了喷泉，我连气都透不出了，是不是？我只希望你发疯的亲戚——”

但是他讲到此处，涡堤孩轻轻将手掩住了他的口唇。他又静了，想着涡堤孩说过的话。同时培儿托达的幻想也似春花怒发，活动起来。她知道涡堤孩的来源，但是不完全，她不知道那水怪究竟是个什么谜，她只觉得他可怕，但是连他名字都不知道。她正在乱想，无意中将黑尔勃郎新近买给她的颈链解了下来，放在水面上拖着，激起一颗颗水珠，溅破落日反射微弱的阳光。一只巨手忽然从但牛勃河伸出来，向她的颈链一抓，拉入水去，培儿托达骇得大声响喊，一阵的冷笑从水底里泛了上来。骑士再也忍不过去，他跳将起来，望着水里高声咒骂，和水鬼挑战。培儿托达失了她最宝爱的颈链又受了大惊，不住地啜泣，她的眼泪好比洋油浇上骑士的怒火，狂焰直卷起来，其时涡堤孩也靠船边坐着，她手放在水里，这水忽然往前一冲，忽然呜呜若有所言，她同她丈夫说道——

“我的亲爱，不要在此地骂我，随你骂谁都可以，但是不要骂我。你知道什么缘故！”

他好容易将他怒焰稍为压下一些，没有直接攻击她，实际他也气得话也说不上来。然后涡堤孩将她放在水里的手探了出来，拿着一串珊瑚的颈链，宝光四射，连人的眼都看花了。

“你拿这串吧，”她说，欣欣将珊瑚递给培儿托达，“这是我赔偿你的，你不要再生气，可怜的孩子。”

但是骑士跳了过来。他从涡堤孩手中将那可爱的珍玩抢了过来，往河里一抛，大声怒吼道——

“原来你依旧和他们来往，是不是？好，你就和他们一起住去，随你们出什么鬼戏法，也好让我们人类过太平日子，哼，你变的好戏法。”

但是他看见可怜的涡堤孩呆呆地望着她，两泪交流，刚才她想拿珊瑚来安慰培儿托达那只手依旧震震地张着。她愈哭愈悲，好像小孩平空受了责备一般。最后她凄然说道——

“唉！蜜甜的朋友，唉！再会吧！你不应该如此，但是只要你忠信，我总尽力替你豁免。唉！但是我现在一定要去了，我们年轻的生活就此告终。休矣！休矣！何至于此，休矣！休矣！”

说着她一翻身就不见了。似乎她自己投入水里，又似乎她被拉入水，究竟谁也说不定她怎样去的，总之一霎时她葬身但牛勃浪涛中心，音踪杳绝，只剩几个小波也绕住船边似乎啜泣，似乎隐隐还说着“休矣！休矣！忠信要紧！休矣！”

黑尔勃郎无论如何忍心，再也止不住热泪迸流，差不多晕了过去。

一霎时她消失在但牛勃河的浪涛中心。





第十六章　黑尔勃朗此后所遭逢的情形


俗语说事过情迁：随你怎样倾江倒海的悲伤，随你悲伤的性质如何，随你感情沸流到一千二百度或是低降到一百个零度之零度，随你如何灰心，随你张开眼来只见愁云惨雾，生命的种种幸福都变成荒芜惨绝。只要你不死，只要你苟延残喘，你总逃不过时间的法力，钟上嘀嗒过了一秒，你悲伤的烈度，无形中也嘀嗒宽了一些，你就愈觉得这残喘有苟延之必要，时间愈过去，你的悲度也消解得愈快，往往用不到几月甚至于不到几天，你完全可以脱离悲伤的束缚，重新提起兴致过你的快乐日子。怪不得我当初要疑心三年之孝太不近情理。不要说父母，现在社会上父母不是儿女的冤家对头已是难得难得，何况能有心坎深处真纯的爱情——不要说父母和子女关系，就是我们男女相爱热度最高的朋友，大家香喷喷会呼吸热烘烘会接吻的时候，不消说自然是卿卿我我，誓海盟山，我的性命就是你的，你的魂灵就是我的，若然你有不测不消说我自然陪你死，就是不死，我总终身独守，纪念我们不断的爱情。而且我敢保证他们发誓的辰光，的确正心诚意，纯粹从爱河里泛起来的波浪，情炉里飞起来的火焰，你要不相信真是阿弥陀佛，世上再也没有相信得过的事了。这类经验彼此不消客气，多少总有过些。但是——我很恨这转语，但是我实在不得不但是——但是金子要火来试验，你立的情誓要不幸的生死盛衰聚散来试验，试验的结果究竟百分里有几分是黄金呢？当然你我都不希望有这类试验之必要，不过试验要轮到你的时候你又有什么法想呢？从前听说中国社会上，虽然男女夫妇间从不知爱情为何物，而丈夫死了妻子往往有殉节的风俗，据说有的媳妇自己还想活不肯死，她的翁姑可放她不过，因为她死了可以请贞节牌坊，光宗耀祖哩。那班可怜的少妇，就是不全死，亦得半死，因为一万个寡妇里面，难得有一个再有嫁人的机会。这类情形我们听听都不忍心，可笑他们黄种人还自以为是古文明，说西方人野蛮，其实他们那样荒谬绝伦的家庭婚姻制度，还不是和亚菲利加吃人的野人相差无几吗？至于讲到我们情形可大不相同，不但妻死了，男子再娶，丈夫死了，女人自由再嫁，就是大家没有死，鲜鲜地活着，彼此依旧嫁娶自由，只要法庭上经过一番手续就是！或者彼此要是更文明些爽性连法律都不管，大家实行自由恋爱就是，个人自由权，爱情自由，个个字都是黄金打的，谁也不能侵犯。在这样情形之下从前同生同死的盟誓，自然减少了许多，大家都是“理性人”了！若然爱偶之一遭了不幸，我们当然不能说那活的连悲伤的情绪都没有，但是即使有，恐怕也是见风就化散吧！

著书人无端跑了一趟野马，他实在自己都不知道讲了些什么，他当然要向读者深深道一个歉，至于关于本题的意思，简单说无非是激烈的情感是不能常住的。我们极怒的时候，只觉得全身的火一起上升到脑里，一丝丝神经都像放花筒似的迸火，脑壳子像要胀破，头发胡须——如其你有胡须——都像直竖起来；但是我敢赌一百万东道谁能将毛发竖他一点钟，就是半点钟一刻你都赢了。最剧烈的悲伤虽然比大怒的生命可以长些，但是也长不到哪里，我们过后追念死者，似乎仍旧觉得不快，但是这是忧思，不是积极的悲了。

现在言归正传。上节停在涡堤孩一入水黑尔勃郎一时悲伤晕了过去。但是你放心，他醒过来的时候悲伤也就差不多了。他回到林斯推顿城堡，自然不很高兴，有时居然泫然涕下，有时伸出两手像要抱人似的。他自己倒很担心恐怕他再也不会快乐，结果他的生命，也就悲伤完结。同时他也经验到——我们差不多大家经验过的——悲伤的一种快感，很难以言语形容的一种情形。培儿托达也陪他饮泣，所以二人一起在林斯推顿静悄悄过了好几时，时常纪念涡堤孩，彼此几乎将从前互吸的感情忘了。并且涡堤孩现在时常梦里来会丈夫。她来总同在时一样，很温柔地抱住他，一会儿离去，依旧啜泣，所以往往他醒过来的时候不知道何故他的双腮尽湿：究竟是她的眼泪呢，还是他自己的呢？

但是可畏的时光愈过，他的梦也逐渐减少，他的愁也逐渐迟钝。那时我们久别的老渔翁忽然在林斯推顿城堡出现。他听见涡堤孩的消息，他来要他女儿回去，再也不许她和独身的贵人住在一起。“因为，”他说，“我女儿究竟爱她生父不爱我都不问，但是现在她名誉要紧，所以他所要求的，再也没有商量余地。”

老渔人声势汹汹，但是黑尔勃郎一想他如其让培儿托达跟父亲回去，她吃不惯苦不用说，就是他自己一个人独留在这宽大的城堡里冷清清的日子如何过得去，况且他自始至终爱培儿托达的，就是涡堤孩在时“形格势禁”，此番她长别以后，他还没有跳出悲伤圈子，所以把培儿托达暂时搁起，如今老头一来啰嗦，他只得明说他想留他女儿的意思。但是老儿很不赞成这一头亲事。老儿很爱涡堤孩，以为谁都不能决定涡堤孩之入水的确是死。就是涡堤孩的尸体的确永卧在但牛勃河底或是已经被水冲入海去，培儿托达对于她的死至少应负一部分的责任，如何可以乘机来占据她的地位呢？但是老儿也很爱骑士，他女儿温柔的态度，至诚的祷告，为涡堤孩流的涕，一一打动了老人的心，结果他还是答应。此事就此定局，骑士立即打发人去请哈哀尔孟神父，就是当初在老渔人家替他和涡堤孩结婚的神父，求他来城堡庆祝他第二次的婚姻。

神父接到了林斯推顿爵主的信，立刻就动身，向城堡进发。他走路走得过急有时连气都喘不过来，或者他脚上背后的老病发作，他总对自己说：“也许我还可以消化不幸！老骨头争气些，赶到目的再瘫不迟！”他提起精神一口气赶到了城堡的庭中。

那对新人手挽手儿坐在树荫下，老渔人坐在旁边。他们一见哈哀尔孟神父，大家欣然跳将起来，赶上去欢迎他。但是他什么话都没有说，单请新郎陪他进堡去密谈。骑士正觉踌躇，神父开口说道——

“我何必定要密谈呢，林斯推顿的贵胄先生？我要讲的话就是关系你们三人的话，既然大家有关系，自然大家一齐参与为是。然则我先要问你，骑士先生，你是否可以确信你的妻子的确死了？我可不是那么想。她失踪情形我暂且不论，因为我当时并不目睹。但是她对于你始终是一个信义忠实的妻子，那是没有问题的。而在这最近十四天夜间，我梦里总见她站在我床边，搓着她一双柔软的小手，一面的愁容，轻轻地叹气道：‘拦止那桩事，亲爱的神父呀！我还是活着！嘻！救他的生命！嘻！救他的灵魂！’但是我莫名其妙，不知道那桩什么事。后来果然来了你的专差，所以我星夜赶来，不是来替你们结婚，但是来分散那不能在一起的人。让她去吧！黑尔勃郎！让他去吧，培儿托达！他另有所属。你看他满脸悲凄不散的愁痕，依旧未退哩。从来没有如此的新郎，况且她梦里明明告诉我，或者你让他去，否则你也从此不会享福。”

在他们三人的心里，大家都承认神父的话不错，但是他们早已爬上了老虎背，再也爬不下来。就是那老渔翁亦被他们骗得一厢情愿以为再也不会有意外发生。他们三人就你一声我一句，和一片好心的神父辩驳。最后老牧师一看情形不对，知道无可挽回，摇摇头，叹了气，转身就出堡门，非但不肯住夜，连汤水都不肯喝。但是黑尔勃郎总以为是他年老了脾气乖僻，毫不介意，另外派人到邻近神道院里去请一位牧师来行礼，那边一口答应，他们就将婚期都定了。





第十七章　骑士的梦


天将晓未晓的时候，骑士半醒半眠卧在床上。他想要重新睡熟，他觉得一种恐怖将他推了回来，因为梦乡里有鬼。但是如其他想要完全醒过来，他耳旁只听得窸窸窣窣一群天鹅扑着翅膀和喁喁欢娱的声音，使得他神经飘飘荡荡总是振作不起。最后他似乎又睡熟了，恍恍惚惚只觉得那群鹅将他放在柔软的翅膀上，腾云驾雾似的飞山过海，一路唱着和美的鹅歌。他想恐怕这是死兆吧，但是也许另有缘故。忽然他觉得飞到了地中海上。一只鹅在他耳边唱说：“此是地中海。”他向下一望，只见海水水晶似的透明，可以直望到海底。他看见了涡堤孩，她坐在水晶厅上。她在那里伤心哭泣，满面愁容。骑士不禁想起了从前那一长篇历史，当初何等快乐，后来如何不幸，如今彼此又为渺渺云水隔住。但是涡堤孩似乎不觉得他在场。枯尔庞依旧拖着长白袍走到她跟前，不许她再哭。她抬起头来，很严正地对他望着，说道：“我虽然身在水底，但是我有灵魂。所以我依旧悲泣，虽然你不能知道眼泪的意义和价值。那是上帝赐福，凡有忠实灵魂的人，总是受天保佑的。”他摇头不信，想了一想说道：“但是，我的侄女，你还得受我们原行法律的支配，他如其不忠信而重娶，他的命应该赔偿给你。”涡堤孩道：“他到如今还是鳏夫，他刺痛的心上依旧保留着爱我的情。”枯尔庞冷笑道：“但是他快做新郎，一两天之内只要牧师一祷告，婚姻就成立，那时你定须杀死这重娶的丈夫。”涡堤孩笑答道：“但是我不能，我已经将喷泉塞住，不要说你，连我都不能进城堡去。”枯尔庞道：“但是若然他离开了城堡，或是有一天喷泉重新开了呢？你要知道他并不注意那类小事情。”“唯其为此，”涡堤孩又从眼泪里笑道，“唯其为此，所以他的梦魂现在停在地中海面上，听我们的警告哩。那是我故意安排的。”于是枯尔庞仰起头来，恨恨地看着骑士，一顿足，忽然穿入水波深处去了。那群鹅重新又唱将起来，展开翼儿就飞，骑士昏昏沉沉似乎过了无数高山大川，重新回到了林斯推顿城堡，在床上醒了过来。

他能看见涡堤孩坐在海底的水晶厅里。





他一张开眼，只见床前站着他的侍从，报告他神父哈哀尔孟依旧在邻近逗留着，他昨晚见他在森林里用树枝砌了一间茅棚在里面过夜。问他为什么，他答道：“除了结婚以外，还有旁的礼节，我这次就使没有经手喜事，也许还有另外用处。做人总得处处预备。况且丧事喜事一样都是人事，眼光望远些，谁都免不了的。”

骑士听了这番话，又想起方才的梦，种种的猜想都奔到他胸头。但是他终究以为事情既已安排妥当岂有迷信妖梦改变之理，所以结果他毅然决然照原定计划做去。





第十八章　黑尔勃郎举行婚礼的情形


黑尔勃郎和培儿托达举行婚礼那一天，林斯推顿城堡中贵客到了不少，外面看来，很是热闹欢喜，但是当事人的心里，恰有一种说不出的不舒服，良心上不安宁。出神见鬼的事倒没有，因为那喷池依旧塞住，枯尔庞的徒党无从进身。新郎自己不用说，就是老渔人乃至于曾经见过涡堤孩的亲友，都觉得似乎少了一个主要人物，因为涡堤孩在时待人和善得众人欢心，如今不明不白地失了踪，偏是隔上不多时发现了这头亲事，也难怪旁人心里一半诧异一半不平。那天喜筵的时候大家表面上虽然应酬谈笑，心里谁也离不了涡堤孩的印象，偶然呀的一声有人推门进来，大家都张皇注视，疑心是涡堤孩来了，等得看明白进来的人是掌礼或是酒仆，他们都显出失望的神情，本来满席的笑语喧闹，也忽然沉了下去，变成忧郁的寂静。新娘要算最活泼，最满足，但是连她也有时觉得有些诧异这林斯推顿堡内主妇一席如何轮到了她，一面又想起涡堤孩冰冷的尸体，僵卧在但牛勃河底，或是已经随流入海不知去向。神父那番不吉利的警告又不住地在他们三人脑筋中烦扰，并且引起种种奇异的幻想。

天还没有黑喜筵就散了，不是因为新郎不耐烦——普通新郎总是不耐烦的——而为上面所说的几层缘故，宾主都觉得有兴不能尽，空气中似乎布满了不愉快的预兆、愁惨的情景。培儿托达陪着女客去了，骑士也进内室，一群侍从侍候他换衣服。那天结婚连照例跟随新娘新郎的一群青年男女都没有。

培儿托达想变换她思想的潮流。她吩咐侍女展览黑尔勃郎此次替她预备的衣服面网首饰，打算选出几件，预备明日晓妆。一群侍女就高高兴兴来出主意，这个说新娘应该满头珠翠红衣绿袜，那个说太华丽了也不好，不如单戴白金珠花的面网和白缎银镶的衣裙，配着淡灰丝袜和绿丝绒鞋，一面大家又争着称赞新娘的貌美。培儿托达正在镜里端详自己的倩影，忽然叹道：“但是你们难道没看见这边颈上那些雀斑吗？”

她们一看，果然新娘左边颈皮上有几块黑影子，但是她们只说是“美人斑”，有了这一丝深色，愈显出肤色之白嫩。培儿托达摇摇头，心里想那总是斑点。

她叹口气道：“其实我可以想法子去了它。但是堡庭里的喷泉封闭在那里，从前我总欢喜用那泉水，很有匀净肤色的功效。真的，我只要弄得到一小瓶已经足够！”

“那就够了吗？”一个快捷的侍女笑道，说着溜了出去。

“她总不会得那样冒昧，”培儿托达说，露出半惊半喜的神情，“今天晚上就去撇开那块盖住泉眼的石头吧？”但是一阵子她们就听见一群人走入堡庭，从窗格里望得见那活泼的侍女领头，他们扛着杠杆等类，去重开那喷泉。培儿托达说道：“我实在很愿意他们去打开，只要手续不太麻烦时间不过长就没有什么。”她心里其实很得意，因为如今做了主妇，居然要什么就有什么，开口要闭口到，她欣欣伏在窗口，看他们在庭中月光底下动手。

那群人“杭好旱好”使尽气力，开掘那石块。间或有人叹息，以为旧主妇当初一番心机，如今新主妇当家，头一天就有变更。但是事实上他们用不到费那么大劲。因为等得他们一动手，这喷泉内部似乎有势力帮着他们掀开那块笨石。他们骇然相顾说道：“难道这喷泉压得日久，力量大得连石头都冲得动？”说着，那石块愈起愈高，简直自做主，不用人力轻轻地滚了下来。同时泉眼里迸出一个极高的白水柱。工人们在旁边正在惊异，忽然觉察这水柱变成了一个素衣缟服白网盖面的妇人。她涕泗交流地悲泣，举起双手摇着表示哀痛，慢慢儿，慢慢儿下了喷泉台，往城堡正屋走去。一霎时堡里的人吓得狂奔的狂奔，狂叫的狂叫，新娘在窗内也吓得硬挺挺站着，面无人色，她身旁的侍女也都像触了电一般，动弹不得。等得这形象走近了她房，培儿托达猛然觉得那白网底下的眉目仿佛是涡堤孩。但是这一路悲泣的形象走了过去，迟顿顿，慢吞吞，似乎犯人上刑场的光景。培儿托达高声喊人去寻骑士，但是侍女们只突出一双眼呆看，理也不理，新娘也发了噤，似乎她自己的声音骇住了她。

她们正在石像似的塑着，话也说不出，脚也移不动，这可怕的异客已经走到了城堡正厅，步上那白石的台阶，走进大堂，哀哀地哭，一路尽哭着。伤哉！她初次来到此地何等欢喜呢？

其时骑士在内室已经辞退了侍从。他衣服半解，独自站在一座大衣镜前出神，旁边点着一支很缓的小烛。忽然门上有一个小指弹着，很轻地弹着，那是当初他们夫妻和睦时候的一种记号，涡堤孩要他去的时候，就来用小指轻轻弹门。黑尔勃郎跳将起来，但是他又自语道：“这无非是妄想。我应该登新床去了。”

“是的，你应该，但是一张冷床而已！”他听得门外一个悲泣的声音回答，他从镜子里看见门开了，慢慢儿，慢慢儿，这白色游行的形象移了进来，重复谨谨慎慎将门掩上。“他们已经将喷泉打开，”她软软说道，“如今我已到此，你生命完尽了。”

他觉得他的心停止了跳动，知道数不可逃，但他将手掩面说道——

“不要使我死于恐怖。如其你网后是一鬼相，那就请你不必再揭开，你一下杀了我就算，再不要让我见你。”

“唉！”这形象答道，“难道你不愿意再对我一看吗？我依旧和初次你在湖边发现我的辰光一样美丽，我爱，哟！你还怕我来吓你不成？”

“哟，但愿如此，”黑尔勃郎叹道，“但愿我能死在你吻上！”

“当然，只要你愿意，我最爱的亲亲呀！”她说着，就将手揭去了面罩，一张蜜甜的脸笑了出来，顿时室内好像充满了万道霞光。

恋爱——死！骑士浑身战栗，无量数的情电子从骨髓皮肉五脏六腑四肢百骸里迸射出来，将他的生命灵魂躯壳，一股脑儿地恋爱化——他浑身战栗，展开双手，涡堤孩直扑了进来，泪如泉涌，两片香甜情热颤动的樱唇立刻和骑士的黏在一起，她再也不放，愈搂愈紧，愈紧愈搂，眼泪如潮水般横流，几乎将她的灵魂都冲了出来。她的眼泪泻满他一脸一胸，他还是紧紧抱着，直等到骑士在甜美的不幸中，蜜甜的香唇上，气绝身亡，从她可爱的玉臂圈中漏出，倒卧在长眠的榻上。

“我已经哭死了他。”涡堤孩告诉她在前房碰到的侍役，她慢慢从惶骇无措的人群中走入喷泉中去了。





第十九章　骑士黑尔勃郎埋葬的情形


林斯推顿爵主的死讯一传出去，头一个到门的就是那等办丧事的神父哈哀尔孟，刚巧上一天特请来结婚的牧师仓皇逃走，二人在大门口撞一个满怀。

神父听他们说了详情以后说道：“命该如此，这丧礼如今落在老人身上，我也不要什么伙伴。”他就过去用例话安慰那新娘寡妇，但是培儿托达尘心烦重，如何能听得进老牧师不入耳之谈。老渔翁倒很明白，虽然他女婿女儿遭此不幸，他也不免悲悼，但当培儿托达咒骂涡堤孩为女妖鬼怪时，老人总摇头叹道：“这场公案也只有如此了结一法。我只看见上帝公平的判决，况且，黑尔勃郎死后受苦痛最深者无过执行死刑那人，我们可怜被摒的涡堤孩。”他帮着料理丧务，一切排场都按照死者的身份。他们林斯推顿家的葬地在邻近一乡村，是他们的领地，骑士的尸体照例要与他的祖先合葬。城堡里所有的仪仗都已排列起来，预备一起葬人，因为黑尔勃郎是林司推顿的末裔，送葬的人也都跟着棺柩上路，在青天底下迤逦走着，口里唱丧歌，神父哈哀尔孟手执一高大的十字架在前领路，后面跟着培儿托达，她父亲老渔人在旁边扶住她。其时大家忽然觉察培儿托达的侍从一片黑服中间，发现了一个雪白的形象，头面罩得很密，双手绞扭显出极端痛苦悲伤。那形象旁边的人都暗暗吃吓，或向旁闪，或往后退，她们这么一动，那白像又发现在后面一群人中间，他们又起恐慌，纷纷躲避，所以结果这长串送殡的仪从，闹得不成体统。其中有几个军士胆子很大，走近去向那白影说话，想将她推挤出去，但是他们的手一触到，形象就融灭，一转眼又只见她于于徐徐跟在丧会中进行。直到后来所有的女侍从都逃避干净，所以这白影悠悠荡荡贴紧了培儿托达。但是她移得很慢，前面的新孀简直没有觉得，自此她缓缓跟着前进。

他们到了墓地，所有的丧仪和人列成圆形围住墓坑。培儿托达方才觉到了这不速之客，她又骇又恼将身倒退，要她离开骑士的葬所。但是罩面的白影轻轻摇头不允，伸手向着培儿托达似乎款求的模样，孀妇不禁感动，她顿时想起了从前涡堤孩待她的好处，和在但牛勃河上给她那串珊瑚项珠。但是神父哈哀尔孟吩咐禁声，大家一起在尸体前默祷。培儿托达跪了下来，其余送葬的人连坟上做工的也都跪下。他们祷完站起来的时候，白色的异客已经不见，在她跪的一点上忽然从泥土里涌起一柱珠泉，洁白如银，将骑士的新坟浇洒一周，然后平流到墓地旁边，积成一个美丽的小潭。后世那村上的人还时常对着这泉水嗟叹，相信是可怜的涡堤孩的不昧精灵，展开她仁爱的手臂永远抱住她心爱的人。





[1]本书选用的是另一个与译文相得益彰的版本，而非高斯版本。

